Concept Component Analysis:
A Principled Approach for Concept Extraction in LLMs
Yuhang Liu1Erdun Gao1Dong Gong2Anton van den Hengel1Javen Qinfeng Shi1
Project page:https://sites.google.com/view/yuhangliu/projects/cca
Abstract
Developing human understandable interpretation
of large language models (LLMs) becomes in-
creasingly critical for their deployment in essen-
tial domains. Mechanistic interpretability seeks
to mitigate the issues through extracts human-
interpretable process and concepts from LLMs’
activations. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have
emerged as a popular approach for extracting in-
terpretable and monosemantic concepts by decom-
posing the LLM internal representations into a dic-
tionary. Despite their empirical progress, SAEs
suffer from a fundamental theoretical ambiguity:
the well-defined correspondence between LLM
representations and human-interpretable concepts
remains unclear. This lack of theoretical ground-
ing gives rise to several methodological chal-
lenges, including difficulties in principled method
design and evaluation criteria. In this work, we
show that, under mild assumptions, LLM repre-
sentations can be approximated as a linear mix-
ture of the log-posteriors over concepts given the
input context, through the lens of a latent vari-
able model where concepts are treated as latent
variables. This motivates a principled framework
for concept extraction, namely Concept Compo-
nent Analysis (ConCA), which aims to recover the
log-posterior of each concept from LLM represen-
tations through a unsupervised linear unmixing
process. We explore a specific variant, termed
sparse ConCA, which leverages a sparsity prior to
address the inherent ill-posedness of the unmix-
ing problem. We implement 12 sparse ConCA
variants and demonstrate their ability to extract
meaningful concepts across multiple LLMs, offer-
ing theory-backed advantages over SAEs.
1Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University
of Adelaide2School of Computer Science and Engineering, The
University of New South Wales. Correspondence to: Yuhang Liu
<yuhang.liu01@adelaide.edu.au>.
Preprint. January 30, 2026.1. Introduction
One of the critical questions surrounding the practical appli-
cation of LLMs is the extent to which and how the concepts
they espouse are ground in reality. The more general ques-
tion is whether a model trained only on natural language
can develop representations of concepts grounded in the
real world (Bowman, 2024; Naveed et al., 2023). Under-
standing this relationship is crucial, as it informs not only
how we interpret model mechanism, but also how we can
systematically analyze, evaluate, and manipulate these repre-
sentations. A promising approach to investigating such ques-
tions is to extract meaningful semantic units, i.e., human-
interpretable concepts, embedded within the models’ inter-
nal representations and behaviors (Singh et al., 2024). By
studying these units, we can begin to probe which aspects
of a model’s behavior are aligned with human-interpretable
concepts, and how multiple concepts interact.
1.1. Revisiting SAEs for Concept Extraction
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs).Recently, SAEs have been
explored for this purpose (Elhage et al., 2022; Bricken et al.,
2023; Huben et al., 2023), offering a potential perspective
through which to analyze model behavior, including how
such concepts interact and compose to generate the next
token. Technically, SAEs learn a set of features whoselinear
combinations can reconstruct the internal representations of
LLMs, while enforcing asparsityprior on the features, in
the hope that each feature corresponds to a monosemantic
concept (Huben et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2025; Braun et al.,
2024; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a;b; Mudide et al., 2024;
Chanin et al., 2024; Lieberum et al., 2024; He et al., 2024;
Karvonen et al., 2024; Bussmann et al., 2024).
Hypotheses Behind SAEs.Linearity and sparsity, the two
key components of SAEs, are jointly expected to promote
the emergence of monosemantic and interpretable concepts.
The justification for these two components primarily re-
lies on two key hypotheses, (i) the linear representation
hypothesis and (ii) the superposition hypothesis. The for-
mer suggests that concepts are often encoded linearly in
LLMs (Tigges et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Moschella
1arXiv:2601.20420v2  [cs.LG]  29 Jan 2026
Concept Component Analysis
et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Gurnee et al.,
2023; Rajendran et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024), enabling
them to be recovered via linear decoding. The latter argues
that LLMs tend to represent more features than they have
neurons for, leading to overlapping (i.e., superimposed) rep-
resentations within the same neurons (Elhage et al., 2022).
To make such representations reliable and interpretable, fea-
tures should activate sparsely, reducing interference between
them (Elhage et al., 2022; Huben et al., 2023).
1.2. Motivation and Contributions
While these two hypotheses support SAEs, the deeper theo-
retical question remains unresolved.
/thumbtackProblem.What is the theoretical relationship between
LLM representations and human-interpretable concepts?
A Deeper Look into SAEs.Without a clear answer, both
principled method design and evaluation become major con-
cerns. In terms of method design, for example, while the
decoder in SAEs reconstructs representations throughlin-
earcombinations of learned features, the encoder typically
includes anonlinearactivation function, typically Relu ,
following a linear layer. This asymmetry raises a concern
about the rationale for introducing the nonlinear activation
functions. Moreover, it remains unclear whether sparsity
should be imposed directly on the feature space learned by
SAEs, or instead on a transformed space derived from it,
given the unclear relationship between these features and
the underlying concepts. This unclear relationship, on the
evaluation side, also makes principled assessment difficult,
i.e., it remains unclear what criteria should be used to deter-
mine whether a feature meaningfully captures a concept, as
also recognized in recent works (Makelov et al., 2024; Gao
et al., 2025; Kantamneni et al., 2025).
Contributions.We propose a principled approach for ex-
tracting concepts from LLM representations, grounded in
a well-defined theoretical relationship between the repre-
sentations and human-interpretable concepts (see Figure 1).
We begin by analyzing this relationship through the lens
of a latent variable model, in which text data are generated
by an unknown process over latent, human-interpretable
concepts. We show that, under mild conditions, LLM rep-
resentations learned by next-token prediction frameworks
can be approximately expressed as a linear mixture of the
logarithm of the posteriors of individual latent concepts,
conditioned on the input context. Based on this insight,
we introduce a principled approach, that we label Concept
Component Analysis (ConCA), which aims to invert the
linear mixture to recover the log-posterior of each concept
in an unsupervised manner. We propose a specific variant
of ConCA, referred as Sparse ConCA, which incorporates
a sparsity prior to regularize the solution space, motivatedby the widespread adoption of the superposition hypothesis.
We emphasize that alternative regularization strategies re-
main flexible and open for future exploration. We evaluate
the proposed Sparse ConCA using linear probing with coun-
terfactual text pairs, a theoretically motivated supervised
method for concept extraction, and benchmark its perfor-
mance against SAE variants across multiple model scales
and architectures (Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023), Gemma3
(Team et al., 2025), Qwen3 (Team, 2025)). We further test
it on a downstream task spanning 113 datasets, empirically
confirming the advantages of ConCA.
2. What Do Representations in LLMs Learn?
In this section we establish a theoretical connection between
LLM representations learned through next-token prediction
framework and human-interpretable concepts. To this end,
we first construct a latent variable model (LVM) in which ob-
served text data are generated by an unknown process over
latent variables representing human-interpretable concepts.
We then show that, when LLMs are trained on the observed
data using a next-token prediction framework, their learned
representations can be approximated as a linear mixture of
the log-posteriors of individual latent variables, conditioned
on the input context. This perspective not only deepens our
understanding of how human-interpretable concepts are or-
ganized within LLM representations, but more importantly,
it provides a principled foundation for extracting concepts
from the representations. We define concept as follows:
Definition 2.1.Aconceptis defined as a discrete latent
variable zi∈ Vi,|Vi|=k i,where each value in Vicorre-
sponds to a distinct, human-interpretable semantic attribute
(e.g., tense, plurality, sentiment, syntactic role, or topic).
The full latent configuration is given by z= (z 1, . . . , z ℓ),
whose components specify the underlying semantic factors
that give rise to the observed input context xand the next
tokenythrough the latent generative process.
2.1.Preliminary: A Discrete Latent Variable Generative
Model For Text
We begin by a LVM in which human-interpretable concepts
are modeled as latent variables governing the generation of
text data (Liu et al., 2025a). Formally, both the observed
context xand the next token yare assumed to be gener-
ated from a set of latent variables z. Here xandyserve
as input to the next-token prediction objective used to train
LLMs. A human-interpretable concept is formally defined
as a latent variable zithat captures a human-interpretable
factor underlying the generation of text data, such as a
topic, sentiment, syntactic role, or tense. Notably, arbi-
trary interdependencies or structural relationships among
the latent variables are allowed. We assume the observed
variables x∈ Vnandy∈ V , and the latent variables
2
Concept Component Analysis
 Latent Concept Space  MaleFemaleGender:Royalty:YesNo
Unknown Generative ProcessObserved Text Space`King’`Queen’`Man’`Women’
Next Token Prediction              LLM  Representation Space(Linear Mixtures of Concept Log-Posteriors)
Concept Component AnalysisLog-Posterior Concept Space……Alogp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),+bAlogp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),+blogp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),logp(/uni007C),……Generative ModelInference ModelConcept Component Analysis
Figure 1.We introduce a latent variable generative model in which observed the input context xand next token y, arises from an unknown
underlying process over latent concepts z(Sec. 2.1). Under this model, we show that LLM representations fx(x), learned by next-token
prediction, can be approximated as a linear mixture of the column vector obtained by stacking log-posteriors of individual latent concepts
logp(z i|x), conditioned on the input, i.e.,f x(x)≈A
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
+b, whereAis a mixing matrix andb
is a constant (Sec. 2.2). Motivated by this, we propose Concept Component Analysis (ConCA), a method for linearly unmixing LLM
representationsf x(x)to recover the log-posteriors over individual latent conceptslogp(z i|x)(Sec. 3).
z= (z 1, . . . , z ℓ)∈ V 1× ··· × V ℓto be discrete1, with
zi∈ Vi,|Vi|=k i, i= 1, . . . , ℓ . Under this formulation,
the joint distribution over the observed context xand next
tokenyis given by:
p(x, y) =X
zp(x|z)p(y|z)p(z),(1)
where p(z) is a prior over the latent concepts, and p(x|z)
andp(y|z) model the conditional generation of context and
next token, respectively.
2.2. Representations in LLMs Linearly Encode
Log-Posteriors over Concepts
Intuitively, since the latent concepts zcharacterize the un-
derlying generative factors of the text data, as defined in
Eq. 1, the representations learned from such data should en-
code information about these concepts. To examine in detail
how these representations capture latent concepts, we now
turn to the next-token prediction framework, which serves
as the standard training framework for LLMs. Specifically,
the next-token prediction framework models the conditional
distribution of the next tokenygiven the input contextx2:
p(y|x) =exp (f(x)Tg(y))P
yiexp (f(x)Tg(yi)).(2)
Here, yidenotes a specific value of the output token y,
f(x)∈Rmmaps the input xinto a m-dimensional (depend-
ing on the specific model used) representation space, and
1A detailed justification for the discrete assumption can be
found in Liu et al. (2025a).
2More rigorously, this assumes a parametric form of the con-
ditional distribution p(y|x) as a softmax over inner products in
an optimally discriminative representation space. Such optimality
assumption is canonical for establishing clear and meaningful iden-
tifiability results (Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016; Hyvarinen et al.,
2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020).g(y)∈Rmretrieves the classifier weight vector correspond-
ing to tokeny, i.e., the look-up table used for prediction.
Given the generative model from Eq. 1 and the inference
model from Eq. 2, our goal is to formally characterize how
the learned representations f(x) relate to the latent concepts
z. In particular, we seek to establish a precise mathematical
relationship, thereby serving as the theoretical foundation
for concept component analysis developed in Sec. 3. We
now present the following key result:
Theorem 2.2.Suppose latent variables zand the observed
variables xandyfollow the generative models defined in
Eq. 1. Assume the following holds:
(i)(Diversity Condition)There exist m+ 1 values of y, such
that the matrix L= 
g(y=y 1)−g(y=y 0), ...,g(y=
ym)−g(y=y 0)
of sizem×mis invertible,
(ii)(Informational Sufficiency Condition)The conditional
entropy of the latent concepts given the context is close to
zero, i.e.,H(z|x)→0,
(iii) (Regularity Condition)For any two values yiandy0, the
total variation (TV) distance between the corresponding
latent concept posteriors satisfies TV 
p(z|y i), p(z|
y0)
=1
2P
zp(z|y i)−p(z|y 0)=o(|log(1−
e−H(z|x))|−1),asH(z|x)→0,
then the representations f(x) in LLMs, which are learned
through the next-token prediction framework, are related to
the true latent variablesz, by the following relationship:
f(x)≈A
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
+b,(3)
where Ais am×(Pℓ
i=1ki)matrix, and bis a bias vector3.
3Here, [logp(z i|x)] zidenotes the column vector of
log-probabilities of all possible values of zi.
[logp(z 1|
x)]z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓrepresents the column vector ob-
tained by stacking these vectors.
3
Concept Component Analysis
Justification for the Conditions. Condition (i) is closely
related to the data diversity assumption in earlier work for
identifiability analysis in the context of nonlinear indepen-
dent component analysis (Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016; Hy-
varinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020), and has
recently been employed to identifiability analyses of la-
tent variables in the context of LLMs (Roeder et al., 2021;
Marconato et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025a). Intuitively, Condi-
tion (i) implies that there is a sufficiently large number of dis-
tinct values of ythat the mdifference vectors g(yi)−g(y 0)
(fori= 1, . . . , m ) span the image of g. This is a mild as-
sumption, as pointed out by Roeder et al. who emphasized
that the set of m+ 1 values {yi}m
i=0required to generate
difference vectors g(yi)−g(y 0)that are linearly depen-
dent has measure zero, given that both the initialization and
subsequent updates of the parameters of gare stochastic.
Turning to Condition (ii), it can be seen as amild relaxation
of a standard invertibility assumption commonly adopted for
identifiability analysis within causal representation learning
community, i.e., the mapping from ztoxin the generative
model (Eq. 1) is assumed to be deterministic and invertible.
This implies H(z|x) = 0 , to ensure exact recovery of the
latent variables. By contrast, our assumption only requires
thatH(z|x)→0 , allowing for approximate invertibility
fromztoxin practice. This relaxation also implies that
only an approximate recovery is achievable, as shown in
Eq. 3. Finally, in the context of the latent variable model in
Eq. 1, Condition (iii) requires that the posterior distributions
p(z|y) vary smoothly across different tokens. This is intu-
itive in practice, as individual tokens are typically associated
with only a small subset of latent concepts, while each latent
concept may correspond to many different tokens, leading
to limited variation inp(z|y)(Liu et al., 2025a).
♂lightbulbInspiration:Eq. 3 in Theorem 2.2 implies that LLM
representations, learned through the next-token predic-
tion framework, are essentially a linear mixture of the
log-posteriors of individual latent concepts given the
input context, that is, the logp(z i|x). This provides a
theoretical foundation for exploring individual concepts
by linearly unmixing the representations, which moti-
vates the development of ourConCAin Sec. 3.
3. ConCA: A Principled Approach for
Concept Extraction in LLMs
Grounded in Theorem 2.2, we now introduceConCA, a
principled approach that recovers thelog posteriorsof in-
dividual latent concepts conditional on the input context,
i.e.,logp(z i|x), by inverting the linear mixture in Eq. 3, in
a unsupervised way. This enables us to decompose LLM
representations f(x) into interpretable concept-level com-
ponents.3.1. Challenges in Designing ConCA
Recovering logp(z i|x)fromf(x) presents two main chal-
lenges:
/exclamati⌢n-triangleKey Challenges: 1Ill-posed inverse problem:
The inversion of Eq. 3 is inherently ill-posed because
there exist many possible solutions that produce the
same LLM representations. Without additional con-
straints or regularization, the solution space is large and
ambiguous, leading to non-unique decompositions. 2
Underdetermined problem and overfitting:The is-
sue above is particularly critical when the dimension of
the latent concept space exceeds that of the observed
representations (i.e., ℓ > m ), corresponding to the well-
known underdetermined case. This occurs because, from
the model’s perspective, the number of degrees of free-
dom to be estimated increases, which not only signif-
icantly expands the set of possible solutions but also
amplifies the risk of overfitting.
To address challenge 1, we impose a sparsity prior, requir-
ing that for each context x, only a small subset of latent
concepts zis activated. We refer to this variant assparse
ConCA. This inductive bias is motivated by two consid-
erations: (i) it aligns with the superposition hypothesis, a
widely discussed phenomenon in the study of SAEs, and
(ii) sparsity ensures the identifiability of latent factors under
certain assumptions, i.e., the individual log-probabilities of
latent concepts can be uniquely recovered, as established in
the theory of sparse dictionary learning (Elad & Bruckstein,
2002; Gribonval & Schnass, 2010; Spielman et al., 2012;
Arora et al., 2014). Importantly, we highlight the following:
⋆Highlight:Unlike SAEs, which recover concepts
loosely, like a blurry sketch, sparse ConCA recov-
ers a clearly defined concepts, i.e., the log-posteriors
logp(z i|x).
This key distinction fundamentally changes how sparsity
should be interpreted and enforced. In SAEs and sparse cod-
ing, sparsity is directly imposed on the latent feature space,
where values near zero correspond to inactive features. In
ConCA, however, the situation is inverted. Specifically,
the latent feature space in ConCA corresponds to the log-
posteriors, i.e., logp(z i|x). A value of logp(z i|x) = 0
corresponds to p(zi|x) = 1 , meaning the concept ziisfully
activerather than inactive. Consequently, sparsity in ConCA
should be enforced in the exponential form of the latent fea-
ture space, i.e., the posteriors p(zi|x), ensuring that only a
small subset of concepts is truly active.
Despite its advantages, sparsity alone does not fully resolve
the challenge of overfitting, particularly in underdetermined
4
Concept Component Analysis
Aspect SAEs ConCA
Theoretical grounding(i) Linear representation hypothesis
(ii) Superposition hypothesisTheorem 2.2
ObjectiveRecover monosemantic features Recoverlogp(z i|x)
ArchitectureEncoder: linear + nonlinear activation
Decoder: linearEncoder: linear + module for overfitting
Decoder: linear
Role of sparsityOn feature space On exp-transformed feature space
Evaluation criterionHeuristic, lacks principled metric Theoretically motivated (Sec. 4)
Table 1.Comparison between SAEs and the proposed ConCA. ConCA provides a principled, theoretically grounded framework for
disentangling LLM representations, while SAEs are largely motivated by empirical hypotheses.
settings where the dimensionality of zis much higher than
that of f, as mentioned in challenge 2. While the sparsity
prior helps restrict the solution space, it does not guarantee
generalizable or semantically meaningful decompositions
in practical scenarios. Although theoretical results provide
identifiability guarantees under ideal conditions, real-world
challenges, such as limited data and optimization difficulties,
often violate these conditions, leading to potential overfit-
ting and less reliable concept recovery. In such settings,
multiple sparse solutions may fit the observed representa-
tion equally well, and some may capture meaningless noise
or non-semantic patterns rather than true underlying con-
cepts. Therefore, techniques to mitigate overfitting may be
both useful and even necessary in real applications.
3.2. Sparse ConCA: Architecture and Training
Objective
According to the analysis above, we propose sparse ConCA
as follows:
ˆz=R(W ef(x) +b e), ˆf(x) =W dˆz+b d.(4)
This is a typical autoencoder architecture, where R(·) de-
notes a general regularization module applied to mitigate
overfitting, including but not limited to Dropout, and Lay-
erNorm, as the analysis above to address the challenge 2.
WeandWdare learnable weight matrices of the encoder
and decoder, respectively, and be,bdare the correspond-
ing biases. The vector ˆzcorresponds to an estimate of
[logp(z i|x)] zi. Let the set of all learnable parameters
beΘ ={W e,be,Wd,bd}. We train the proposed sparse
ConCA by minimizing the following objective with respect
toΘ:
min
ΘExh
||ˆf(x)−f(x)||2
2+αS(g( ˆz))i
,(5)
where we apply g(·) to the representations ˆz(correspond-
ing to log-posterior in theory), to map them back into the
probability domain, where sparse activation patterns can be
meaningfully enforced, as motivated by the analysis above
to address challenge 1. Ideally, the exact exp(·) function
would be optimal, but it is prone to numerical instability and
exploding gradients when ˆztakes large values. Therefore,we employ a smooth surrogate in practice, see Sec. 4 for
further implementation details. This regularization function
S(·) is then applied so as to encourage sparsity on g(ˆz).
This can be implemented using standard sparsity constraints
such as L1regularization or structured sparsity variants4.
The hyperparameter αcontrols the trade-off between re-
construction fidelity and sparsity, allowing the model to be
tuned to the expected degree of sparsity.
The key distinctions between our proposed ConCA frame-
work and SAEs are summarized in Table 1. In particular,
ConCA challenges two empirically common design choices
in SAE-style methods:
⋆Nonlinear activation functions (e.g., ReLU) in SAE-
style encoders may be unnecessary.
⋆Sparsity should be imposed on the exponentially
transformed representation space, rather than raw one.
4. Experiments
We train the proposed sparse ConCA on a subset of the
Pile (the first 200 million tokens) (Gao et al., 2020). The
regularization function R(·) is implemented using 4 normal-
ization strategies, including LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016),
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), BatchNorm (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015), and GroupNorm (Wu & He, 2018). For
the function g(·), not exponential function directly, we ex-
plore the exponential with 3 different activation functions,
SELU (Klambauer et al., 2017), SoftPlus (Dugas et al.,
2000), and ELU (Clevert et al., 2015). Although they are not
exact exponentials, these functions preserve exponential-
like behavior for small (i.e., negative) values, ensure nu-
merical and gradient stability, and provide smooth surro-
gates suitable for applying sparsity regularization. In to-
tal, we implement 12 sparse ConCA variants across these
configurations. Sparsity, i.e., S(·), is primarily enforced
viaL1normalization in this work, other choices remain
4We emphasize that sparsity is a design choice, other forms
of regularization are potentially applicable. For instance, non-
negativity (Lee & Seung, 1999; Hoyer, 2004) or bounded-range
constraints (Cruces, 2010; Erdogan, 2013), given that the learned
features are expected to correspond to probabilities.
5
Concept Component Analysis
flexible. To evaluate the effect of model scale, we use rep-
resentations from Pythia models of varying sizes: 70M,
1.4B, and 2.8B Biderman et al. (2023). To assess model
generalization, we also test across different architectures,
including Pythia-1.4B, Gemma3-1b (Team et al., 2025),
and Qwen3-1.7B (Team, 2025). We compare the proposed
sparse ConCA with various SAE variants, including top- k
SAE (Gao et al., 2025), batch-top- kSAE (Bussmann et al.,
2024),p-annealing SAE (Karvonen et al., 2024).
Figure 2.Ablation study of 4 different normalization methods and
3 activation functions. For GroupNorm , the number of groups
(num_groups ) is set to 4, 8, 16, or 32. Left axis shows Mean
of Pearson Correlation (MPC), right axis shows MSE. Each sub-
plot corresponds to one combination of normalization method
and activation function, with each configuration run three times.
Across all configurations, ConCA exhibits a remarkably stable
correlation regime (MPC ≈0.72–0.74, excluding BatchNorm),
with performance largely insensitive to the sparsity level. Notably,
the MSE is affected by the number of groups used in GroupNorm,
i.e., fewer groups lead to lower MSE. Overall, LayerNorm emerges
as a strong choice, offering consistently good performance in both
MPC and MSE.
We evaluate sparse ConCA using two metrics designed to
assess both faithfulness and interpretability:
•Reconstruction losscaptures how well the original LLM
representations are preserved after decomposition. Since
our goal is to reveal the internal structure of the model
without altering its behavior, low reconstruction loss is
essential to ensure that concept extraction introduces min-
imal distortion. Specifically, we use mean squared error
(MSE) as our reconstruction loss metric.
•Pearson correlationquantifies how well the ConCA-
extracted features align with theoretically consistent su-
pervised estimates of logp(z i|x)for each latent concept
zi. Specifically, for each latent concept zi, we construct
counterfactual pairs that differ only in the value of zi
while keeping all other variables unchanged, and traina linear classifier to predict this difference, yielding a
supervised estimate of logp(z i|x). This estimator is the-
oretically motivated, see Sec. F5. We then compute the
Pearson Correlation (PC) between this supervised esti-
mate of logp(z i|x)and the unsupervised ConCA feature.
Higher correlation indicates more accurate recovery.
To compute PC, we require counterfactual text pairs as men-
tioned above. However, constructing such counterfactual
pairs is highly challenging due to the complexity and sub-
tlety of natural language, as noted in prior works (Park et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2024), and remains non-trivial even for
human annotators. For our evaluation, we adopt 27 coun-
terfactual pairs from Park et al. (2023), each differing in a
single concept, as testing dataset. These pairs were derived
from the Big Analogy Test dataset (Gladkova et al., 2016).
Ablation StudyWe first conduct an ablation study over
normalization strategies, activation functions, and spar-
sity strength as mentioned above, to understand the de-
sign choices of sparse ConCA. In total, this yields 21
configurations (For GroupNorm , the number of groups
(num_groups ) is set to 4, 8, 16, and 32, respectively).
Each configuration is trained with varying sparsity coef-
ficients α∈ {1e−1,5e−2,1e−2, . . . ,5e−5}, and every ex-
periment is repeated three times with training on Pythia-
70M. We report results on the two key evaluation metrics
as mentioned, i.e., reconstruction loss and Pearson corre-
lation. Both metrics are summarized in Figure 2, where
the left y-axis shows correlation and the right y-axis shows
reconstruction loss.
Findings.Three main observations emerge:
•Normalization.The primary role of normalization
methods in our framework is to mitigate overfitting.
ForGroupNorm , increasing the number of groups
(num_groups ) tends to result in slightly higher recon-
struction loss. Conversely, LayerNorm achieves the
lowest reconstruction loss among the considered meth-
ods (Dropout ,BatchNorm ). This trend suggests that
full-feature normalization, as performed by LayerNorm ,
better preserves the overall structure of LLM representa-
tions. This may be because, LayerNorm stabilizes per-
sample activations and preserves global feature correla-
tions, which helps ConCA recover concept log-posteriors
more faithfully and generalize better than the others.
•Activation.The purpose of the activation functions is
to serve as a surrogate for the exact exp(·) function, en-
abling more effective enforcement of sparsity. Roughly,
forGroupNorm , all three activations ( SELU ,ELU, and
SoftPlus ) perform similarly, with Pearson correlation
5We note that Liu et al. (2025a) provide a similar approach, but
our result is derived from Theorem 2.2.
6
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 3.Comparison of SAE variants and the proposed ConCA variant across different scales and architectures. The left two shows the
results for Pythia family with varying sizes (70m, 1.4b, 2.8b), while the right compares different architectures across multiple models
(Gemma-3-1b, Pythia-1.4b, Qwen3-1.7b). Pearson correlation (left axis) and MSE (right axis) are reported for each method. ConCA
variants (BatchNorm, GroupNorm, LayerNorm), overall, achieve higher MPC than SAE baselines (Top-k, Batch-Top-k, Panneal), with
LayerNorm-ConCA performing best across all settings (approximately 0.70–0.80). SAE methods remain in a lower band (approximately
0.60–0.70) and show weaker gains with model scale. Reconstruction error (MSE) varies substantially across methods: only Panneal
(SAE) obtain lower MSE, whereas ConCA maintains strong both MPC and MSE. Overall, the figure highlights that ConCA more reliably
extracts concepts, robust across model size and architecture. Full numerical mean and std values, see Sec. Q.
values around 0.725–0.73. In the context of LayerNorm
andDropout ,SoftPlus appears slightly better than
the other two, whereas for BatchNorm ,SELU seems
slightly better.
•Sparsity.The sparsity coefficient αcontrols a trade-off:
too large a value may introduce excessive information
loss, while too small a value fails to induce meaningful
structure. Overall, across the range [5e−3, . . . ,1e−2], the
performance in both reconstruction loss and Pearson cor-
relation remains relatively stable.
Takeaway.The ablation study demonstrates that careful
choices of normalization and activation functions signifi-
cantly improve the performance of sparse ConCA. In the fol-
lowing experiments, considering both reconstructuion loss
and Pearson Correlation, we focus on the most promising
configurations: GroupNorm withnum_groups= 4 and
Softplus ,LayerNorm withSoftplus ,BatchNorm
withSoftplus , labeled as Groupnorm, LayerNorm, and
BatchNorm in the following, respectively. For all of these,
the sparsity hyperparameter, we set α= 1e−4. These design
choices are consistent across repeated trials, highlighting
the stability of the proposed sparse ConCA.
Comparison on Counterfactual Pairs.We next conductexperiments comparing various SAE variants, including
including Topk SAE (Gao et al., 2025), Batch -Topk SAE
(Bussmann et al., 2024), P-anneal SAE (Karvonen et al.,
2024), and the proposed ConCA configurations mentioned
inTakeawayabove. We conduct these experiments across
different scales of the Pythia family to evaluate the scalabil-
ity and effectiveness of each method. Each method is run
across multiple random seeds to ensure robustness, and we
present both the mean and standard deviation of the metrics.
The left in Figure 3 highlights how the proposed ConCA
configurations consistently achieve higher Pearson corre-
lation while maintaining competitive reconstruction loss
compared to the SAE variants, as model size increases from
Pythia-70m to Pythia-2.8b. This performance advantage is
mainly due to the theoretical grounding of ConCA. Specifi-
cally, ConCA employs a principled framework with sparsity
on the exponentiated feature space, whereas SAEs rely on
heuristic assumptions, resulting in more interpretable and
accurate monosemantic concepts across Pythia scales. No-
tably, when considering both MSE and Pearson correlation,
the LayerNorm configuration emerges as the better choice.
The advantages of ConCA are further highlighted across dif-
ferent model families, including Gemma-3-1b, Pythia-1.4b,
and Qwen3-1.7B, as shown in the right of Figure 3. ConCA
configurations generally outperform SAE variants in both re-
7
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 4.Rank-based fraction of features exhibiting significant changes between counterfactual pairs for SAE and ConCA variants.
ConCA shows smaller feature variations, indicating more stable feature responses under counterfactual pairs.
construction and Pearson correlation, demonstrating the ro-
bustness and broad applicability of ConCA. Figure 4 shows
the rank-based fraction of features that change significantly
between counterfactual pairs, indicating that ConCA pro-
duces smaller feature variations than SAE variants under
counterfactual conditions. See Sec. H for details on how this
metric is computed and for additional visualization results.
Figure 5.Test AUC of SAE variants and the proposed ConCA
variants under different few-shot settings across 113 datasets (Top),
and out-of-distribution tasks across 8 datasets (Bottom), respec-
tively. An example of visualization can be found in Sec. I.
Downstream TasksIn the final stage, we conduct a series
of few-shot linear probing experiments to evaluate how well
the features extracted by SAEs and ConCA capture monose-
mantic, human-interpretable concepts. This evaluation is
particularly relevant because disentangled representations
tend to transfer easily and robustly, making them especially
suitable for few-shot learning and out-of-distribution shift
tasks (Fumero et al., 2023).
To this end, we collect 113 binary classification datasets
from Kantamneni et al. (2025) and use them to train lin-
ear classifiers on features extracted by SAEs and ConCA
variants under limited training samples, specifically 4, 8,
16, 32, and 128 samples drawn randomly. After training,we evaluate the linear classifiers and report the Area Under
the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC). The
left panel of Figure 5 shows a trend where ConCA often
achieves higher AUC than SAE variants in few-shot set-
tings, particularly for LayerNorm and GroupNorm variants,
although the differences are not statistically significant un-
der the current sample size.
Furthermore, we extend our evaluation to 8out-of-
distribution(OOD) datasets from Kantamneni et al. (2025),
which are designed to test robustness under distributional
shifts. These datasets include fictional character substitution,
random letter insertion, name order reversal, multilingual
translation perturbations, as well as OOD splits from GLUE-
X. As shown in the right in Figure 5, ConCA consistently
achieves superior performance across nearly all OOD set-
tings, indicating that the representations it learns generalize
more robustly under distributional shifts.
The improvements above are likely attributable to ConCA’s
principled framework, grounded in Theorem 2.2, which mo-
tivates theorem-driven method design by enforcing sparsity
in the exponentiated feature space and leveraging normal-
ization to avoid overfitting, thereby yielding transferable
features under both few-shot and OOD scenarios.
5. Conclusion
Observing the lack of a clear theoretical understanding be-
hind SAEs motivated us to formalize the relationship be-
tween LLM representations and human-interpretable con-
cepts. We showed that, under mild assumptions, LLM rep-
resentations can be approximated as linear mixtures of the
log-posteriors of latent concepts. Building on this insight,
we introduced ConCA, including a sparse variant, to re-
cover these concept posteriors in an unsupervised manner.
Empirical results across multiple models and benchmarks
demonstrate that ConCA extracts features that outperform
SAE variants in both faithfulness and utility. Looking for-
ward, our framework opens the door to principled analysis,
manipulation, and evaluation of LLM representations, as
well as exploration of alternative regularization strategies to
further enhance interpretability.
8
Concept Component Analysis
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of machine learning. There are many potential societal
consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be
specifically highlighted here.
References
Aharon, M., Elad, M., and Bruckstein, A. K-svd: An algo-
rithm for designing overcomplete dictionaries for sparse
representation.IEEE Transactions on signal processing,
54(11):4311–4322, 2006.
Ahuja, K., Mahajan, D., Wang, Y ., and Bengio, Y . Inter-
ventional causal representation learning. InICML, pp.
372–407. PMLR, 2023.
Arora, S., Ge, R., and Moitra, A. New algorithms for
learning incoherent and overcomplete dictionaries. In
Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 779–806. PMLR,
2014.
Arora, S., Ge, R., Ma, T., and Moitra, A. Simple, efficient,
and neural algorithms for sparse coding. InConference
on learning theory, pp. 113–149. PMLR, 2015.
Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. Layer normalization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Biderman, S., Schoelkopf, H., Anthony, Q. G., Bradley,
H., O’Brien, K., Hallahan, E., Khan, M. A., Purohit, S.,
Prashanth, U. S., Raff, E., et al. Pythia: A suite for ana-
lyzing large language models across training and scaling.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Bowman, S. R. Eight things to know about large language
models.Critical AI, 2(2), 2024.
Braun, D., Taylor, J., Goldowsky-Dill, N., and Sharkey, L.
Identifying functionally important features with end-to-
end sparse dictionary learning.Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 37:107286–107325, 2024.
Brehmer, J., De Haan, P., Lippe, P., and Cohen, T. Weakly
supervised causal representation learning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.16437, 2022.
Bricken, T., Templeton, A., Batson, J., Chen, B., Jermyn, A.,
Conerly, T., Turner, N., Anil, C., Denison, C., Askell, A.,
Lasenby, R., Wu, Y ., Kravec, S., Schiefer, N., Maxwell,
T., Joseph, N., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Tamkin, A., Nguyen,
K., McLean, B., Burke, J. E., Hume, T., Carter, S.,
Henighan, T., and Olah, C. Towards monosemanticity:
Decomposing language models with dictionary learning.
Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023.Buchholz, S., Rajendran, G., Rosenfeld, E., Aragam, B.,
Schölkopf, B., and Ravikumar, P. Learning linear causal
representations from interventions under general nonlin-
ear mixing.arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02235, 2023.
Bussmann, B., Leask, P., and Nanda, N. Batchtopk sparse
autoencoders.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06410, 2024.
Cai, Y ., Liu, Y ., Gao, E., Jiang, T., Zhang, Z., Hengel, A.
v. d., and Shi, J. Q. On the value of cross-modal mis-
alignment in multimodal representation learning.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.10143, 2025.
Chanin, D., Wilken-Smith, J., Dulka, T., Bhatnagar, H.,
Golechha, S., and Bloom, J. A is for absorption: Studying
feature splitting and absorption in sparse autoencoders.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14507, 2024.
Clevert, D.-A., Unterthiner, T., and Hochreiter, S. Fast
and accurate deep network learning by exponential linear
units (elus).arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289, 4(5):11,
2015.
Cruces, S. Bounded component analysis of linear mixtures:
A criterion of minimum convex perimeter.IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing, 58(4):2141–2154, 2010.
Dugas, C., Bengio, Y ., Bélisle, F., Nadeau, C., and Garcia,
R. Incorporating second-order functional knowledge for
better option pricing.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 13, 2000.
Dumitrescu, B. and Irofti, P.Dictionary learning algorithms
and applications. Springer, 2018.
Eggert, J. and Korner, E. Sparse coding and nmf. In2004
IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37541), volume 4, pp. 2529–2533.
IEEE, 2004.
Elad, M.Sparse and redundant representations: from theory
to applications in signal and image processing. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2010.
Elad, M. and Bruckstein, A. M. A generalized uncertainty
principle and sparse representation in pairs of bases.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 48(9):2558–2567,
2002.
Elhage, N., Hume, T., Olsson, C., Schiefer, N., Henighan,
T., Kravec, S., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Lasenby, R., Drain,
D., Chen, C., Grosse, R., McCandlish, S., Kaplan, J.,
Amodei, D., Wattenberg, M., and Olah, C. Toy models
of superposition.Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
Erdogan, A. T. A class of bounded component analysis
algorithms for the separation of both independent and
dependent sources.IEEE Transactions on Signal Process-
ing, 61(22):5730–5743, 2013.
9
Concept Component Analysis
Fumero, M., Wenzel, F., Zancato, L., Achille, A., Rodolà,
E., Soatto, S., Schölkopf, B., and Locatello, F. Leveraging
sparse and shared feature activations for disentangled rep-
resentation learning. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2023.
Gao, L., Biderman, S., Black, S., Golding, L., Hoppe, T.,
Foster, C., Phang, J., He, H., Thite, A., Nabeshima, N.,
et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
language modeling.arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027,
2020.
Gao, L., la Tour, T. D., Tillman, H., Goh, G., Troll, R.,
Radford, A., Sutskever, I., Leike, J., and Wu, J. Scaling
and evaluating sparse autoencoders. InThe Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025.
Gladkova, A., Drozd, A., and Matsuoka, S. Analogy-based
detection of morphological and semantic relations with
word embeddings: what works and what doesn’t. In
Proceedings of the NAACL Student Research Workshop,
pp. 8–15, 2016.
Gribonval, R. and Schnass, K. Dictionary identifica-
tion—sparse matrix-factorization via ℓ1-minimization.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56(7):3523–
3539, 2010.
Gu, Y . and Dunson, D. B. Bayesian pyramids: Identifiable
multilayer discrete latent structure models for discrete
data.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B:
Statistical Methodology, 85(2):399–426, 2023.
Gurnee, W., Nanda, N., Pauly, M., Harvey, K., Troit-
skii, D., and Bertsimas, D. Finding neurons in a
haystack: Case studies with sparse probing.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.01610, 2023.
He, Z., Shu, W., Ge, X., Chen, L., Wang, J., Zhou, Y ., Liu,
F., Guo, Q., Huang, X., Wu, Z., et al. Llama scope:
Extracting millions of features from llama-3.1-8b with
sparse autoencoders.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20526,
2024.
Hoyer, P. O. Non-negative matrix factorization with sparse-
ness constraints.Journal of machine learning research, 5
(Nov):1457–1469, 2004.
Huben, R., Cunningham, H., Smith, L. R., Ewart, A., and
Sharkey, L. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable
features in language models. InThe Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Hyvarinen, A. and Morioka, H. Unsupervised feature ex-
traction by time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ica.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
2016.Hyvarinen, A., Sasaki, H., and Turner, R. Nonlinear ica us-
ing auxiliary variables and generalized contrastive learn-
ing. InThe 22nd international conference on artificial
intelligence and statistics, pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019.
Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
InInternational conference on machine learning, pp. 448–
456. pmlr, 2015.
Jiang, Y ., Rajendran, G., Ravikumar, P., Aragam, B., and
Veitch, V . On the origins of linear representations in
large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03867,
2024.
Kantamneni, S., Engels, J., Rajamanoharan, S., Tegmark,
M., and Nanda, N. Are sparse autoencoders useful? a case
study in sparse probing.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16681,
2025.
Karvonen, A., Wright, B., Rager, C., Angell, R., Brinkmann,
J., Smith, L., Mayrink Verdun, C., Bau, D., and Marks, S.
Measuring progress in dictionary learning for language
model interpretability with board game models.Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:83091–
83118, 2024.
Khemakhem, I., Kingma, D., Monti, R., and Hyvarinen,
A. Variational autoencoders and nonlinear ica: A unify-
ing framework. InInternational conference on artificial
intelligence and statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.
Kivva, B., Rajendran, G., Ravikumar, P., and Aragam, B.
Learning latent causal graphs via mixture oracles.Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
18087–18101, 2021.
Klambauer, G., Unterthiner, T., Mayr, A., and Hochreiter,
S. Self-normalizing neural networks.Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Koh, P. W., Nguyen, T., Tang, Y . S., Mussmann, S., Pierson,
E., Kim, B., and Liang, P. Concept bottleneck models. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 5338–
5348. PMLR, 2020.
Kong, L., Chen, G., Huang, B., Xing, E. P., Chi, Y ., and
Zhang, K. Learning discrete concepts in latent hierarchi-
cal models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00519, 2024.
Lee, D. D. and Seung, H. S. Learning the parts of objects
by non-negative matrix factorization.nature, 401(6755):
788–791, 1999.
Leemann, T., Kirchhof, M., Rong, Y ., Kasneci, E., and
Kasneci, G. When are post-hoc conceptual explanations
identifiable? InUncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
1207–1218. PMLR, 2023.
10
Concept Component Analysis
Li, K., Patel, O., Viégas, F., Pfister, H., and Wattenberg, M.
Inference-time intervention: Eliciting truthful answers
from a language model.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Lieberum, T., Rajamanoharan, S., Conmy, A., Smith, L.,
Sonnerat, N., Varma, V ., Kramár, J., Dragan, A., Shah,
R., and Nanda, N. Gemma scope: Open sparse autoen-
coders everywhere all at once on gemma 2.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.05147, 2024.
Liu, Y ., Zhang, Z., Gong, D., Gong, M., Huang, B., Hen-
gel, A. v. d., Zhang, K., and Shi, J. Q. Identifying
weight-variant latent causal models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.14153, 2022.
Liu, Y ., Zhang, Z., Gong, D., Gao, E., Huang, B., Gong, M.,
Hengel, A. v. d., Zhang, K., and Shi, J. Q. Beyond DAGs:
A latent partial causal model for multimodal learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06223, 2024a.
Liu, Y ., Zhang, Z., Gong, D., Gong, M., Huang, B., Hengel,
A. v. d., Zhang, K., and Shi, J. Q. Identifiable latent
neural causal models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15711,
2024b.
Liu, Y ., Zhang, Z., Gong, D., Gong, M., Huang, B., van den
Hengel, A., Zhang, K., and Shi, J. Q. Identifiable latent
polynomial causal models through the lens of change.
InThe Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024c.
Liu, Y ., Gong, D., Cai, Y ., Gao, E., Zhang, Z., Huang, B.,
Gong, M., Hengel, A. v. d., and Shi, J. Q. I predict
therefore i am: Is next token prediction enough to learn
human-interpretable concepts from data?arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.08980, 2025a.
Liu, Y ., Zhang, Z., Gong, D., Gong, M., Huang, B., van den
Hengel, A., Zhang, K., and Shi, J. Q. Latent covariate
shift: Unlocking partial identifiability for multi-source
domain adaptation.Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2025b.
Maaten, L. v. d. and Hinton, G. Visualizing data using
t-sne.Journal of machine learning research, 9(Nov):
2579–2605, 2008.
Makelov, A., Lange, G., and Nanda, N. Towards principled
evaluations of sparse autoencoders for interpretability and
control.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08366, 2024.
Marconato, E., Passerini, A., and Teso, S. Interpretability
is in the mind of the beholder: A causal framework for
human-interpretable representation learning.Entropy, 25
(12):1574, 2023.Marconato, E., Lachapelle, S., Weichwald, S., and Gresele,
L. All or none: Identifiable linear properties of next-
token predictors in language modeling.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.23501, 2024.
Marconato, E., Lachapelle, S., Weichwald, S., and Gresele,
L. All or none: Identifiable linear properties of next-token
predictors in language modeling. InThe 28th Interna-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
2025.
Massidda, R., Geiger, A., Icard, T., and Bacciu, D. Causal
abstraction with soft interventions. InConference on
Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp. 68–87. PMLR,
2023.
Moschella, L., Maiorca, V ., Fumero, M., Norelli, A., Lo-
catello, F., and Rodolà, E. Relative representations enable
zero-shot latent space communication.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.15430, 2022.
Mudide, A., Engels, J., Michaud, E. J., Tegmark, M., and
de Witt, C. S. Efficient dictionary learning with switch
sparse autoencoders.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08201,
2024.
Nanda, N., Lee, A., and Wattenberg, M. Emergent linear rep-
resentations in world models of self-supervised sequence
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00941, 2023.
Naveed, H., Khan, A. U., Qiu, S., Saqib, M., Anwar, S.,
Usman, M., Akhtar, N., Barnes, N., and Mian, A. A
comprehensive overview of large language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.06435, 2023.
Oikarinen, T., Das, S., Nguyen, L. M., and Weng, T.-W.
Label-free concept bottleneck models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.06129, 2023.
Park, K., Choe, Y . J., and Veitch, V . The linear represen-
tation hypothesis and the geometry of large language
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03658, 2023.
Poeta, E., Ciravegna, G., Pastor, E., Cerquitelli, T., and Bar-
alis, E. Concept-based explainable artificial intelligence:
A survey.arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12936, 2023.
Rajamanoharan, S., Conmy, A., Smith, L., Lieberum, T.,
Varma, V ., Kramár, J., Shah, R., and Nanda, N. Improving
dictionary learning with gated sparse autoencoders.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.16014, 2024a.
Rajamanoharan, S., Lieberum, T., Sonnerat, N., Conmy, A.,
Varma, V ., Kramár, J., and Nanda, N. Jumping ahead:
Improving reconstruction fidelity with jumprelu sparse
autoencoders.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14435, 2024b.
11
Concept Component Analysis
Rajendran, G., Buchholz, S., Aragam, B., Schölkopf, B., and
Ravikumar, P. Learning interpretable concepts: Unifying
causal representation learning and foundation models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09236, 2024.
Roeder, G., Metz, L., and Kingma, D. On linear identifia-
bility of learned representations. InInternational Con-
ference on Machine Learning, pp. 9030–9039. PMLR,
2021.
Schölkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., Kalch-
brenner, N., Goyal, A., and Bengio, Y . Toward causal
representation learning.Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):
612–634, 2021.
Schut, L., Tomasev, N., McGrath, T., Hassabis, D., Pa-
quet, U., and Kim, B. Bridging the human-ai knowledge
gap: Concept discovery and transfer in alphazero.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.16410, 2023.
Schwalbe, G. Concept embedding analysis: A review.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.13909, 2022.
Seigal, A., Squires, C., and Uhler, C. Linear causal
disentanglement via interventions.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.16467, 2022.
Shen, X., Liu, F., Dong, H., Lian, Q., Chen, Z., and Zhang,
T. Weakly supervised disentangled generative causal
representation learning.The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 23(1):10994–11048, 2022.
Singh, C., Inala, J. P., Galley, M., Caruana, R., and Gao, J.
Rethinking interpretability in the era of large language
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01761, 2024.
Spielman, D. A., Wang, H., and Wright, J. Exact recovery
of sparsely-used dictionaries. InConference on Learn-
ing Theory, pp. 37–1. JMLR Workshop and Conference
Proceedings, 2012.
Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I.,
and Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout: a simple way to prevent
neural networks from overfitting.The journal of machine
learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Taeb, A., Ruggeri, N., Schnuck, C., and Yang, F. Provable
concept learning for interpretable predictions using vari-
ational autoencoders.arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00492,
2022.
Team, G., Kamath, A., Ferret, J., Pathak, S., Vieillard, N.,
Merhej, R., Perrin, S., Matejovicova, T., Ramé, A., Riv-
ière, M., et al. Gemma 3 technical report.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.19786, 2025.
Team, Q. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.Tigges, C., Hollinsworth, O. J., Geiger, A., and Nanda,
N. Linear representations of sentiment in large language
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15154, 2023.
Varici, B., Acarturk, E., Shanmugam, K., Kumar, A., and
Tajer, A. Score-based causal representation learning with
interventions.arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08230, 2023.
V on Kügelgen, J., Sharma, Y ., Gresele, L., Brendel, W.,
Schölkopf, B., Besserve, M., and Locatello, F. Self-
supervised learning with data augmentations provably
isolates content from style. InNeurIPS, 2021.
von Kügelgen, J., Besserve, M., Wendong, L., Gresele, L.,
Keki ´c, A., Bareinboim, E., Blei, D., and Schölkopf, B.
Nonparametric identifiability of causal representations
from unknown interventions.Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Wu, Y . and He, K. Group normalization. InProceedings of
the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp.
3–19, 2018.
Yang, Y ., Panagopoulou, A., Zhou, S., Jin, D., Callison-
Burch, C., and Yatskar, M. Language in a bottle: Lan-
guage model guided concept bottlenecks for interpretable
image classification. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp. 19187–19197, 2023.
12
Concept Component Analysis
Appendix
Table of Contents
A Related Work 14
B Limitations and Discussion 15
C Comparison of the result in Liu et al. (2025a) 16
D Lemmas in the Context ofH(z|x)→017
E Proof of Theorem 2.2 20
F Justification for Log-Posterior Estimation via Linear Probing 22
G Experimental Details 23
H Visualization of Counterfactual Pair Experiments 25
I Visualization of Classification Tasks 25
J Acknowledgment of LLMs 28
K Practical Diagnostic for the Diversity Condition 28
L Informational Sufficiency Diagnostics 30
M Synthetic validation of marginal vs. joint identifiability. 30
N Verifying Exponential Substitutes on Pythia-70m 32
O Activation Patching Evaluation 32
P Experiments on Additional Counterfactual Concept Pairs 33
Q Detailed Results of Figure 3 34
R Relation with Linear Representation Hypothesis 34
13
Concept Component Analysis
A. Related Work
Sparse Autoencoders and Dictionary LearningThe proposed ConCA framework is closely related to Sparse Autoen-
coders (SAEs) (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a;b; Gao et al., 2025; Braun et al., 2024; Bricken et al., 2023; Huben et al., 2023;
Gao et al., 2025; Mudide et al., 2024; Chanin et al., 2024; Lieberum et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Karvonen et al., 2024;
Bussmann et al., 2024), as both aim to extract and monosemantic human-interpretable concepts from LLM representations
in order to provide mechanistic explanations for their success. However, the two approaches differ fundamentally in their
theoretical foundations. ConCA is grounded in a rigorous theoretical framework, as established in Theorem 2.2, while
SAEs rely on assumptions such as the linear representation hypothesis and the superposition hypothesis. This foundational
difference leads to notable divergences in both method design and evaluation protocols, as discussed in the Introduction. In
addition, our work is also closely connected to the well-established framework of dictionary learning (Dumitrescu & Irofti,
2018; Eggert & Korner, 2004; Elad, 2010; Elad & Bruckstein, 2002; Aharon et al., 2006; Arora et al., 2015). Specifically,
this work bridges next-token prediction framework and dictionary learning by showing that LLM representations acquired
through the next-token prediction framework can be further meaningfully decomposed.
Causal Representation LearningThis work is also related to causal representation learning (Schölkopf et al., 2021),
which seeks to identify latent causal variables from observational data (Brehmer et al., 2022; V on Kügelgen et al., 2021;
Massidda et al., 2023; von Kügelgen et al., 2023; Ahuja et al., 2023; Seigal et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022;
Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024c; 2025b; 2024b;a; Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016; Hyvarinen et al.,
2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2025; Rajendran et al., 2024). Most of those works focus on continuous latent and
observed variables, we explore the setting of discrete variables. A subset of studies has investigated causal representation
learning in discrete spaces (Gu & Dunson, 2023; Kong et al., 2024; Kivva et al., 2021), but these typically assume specific
graphical structures and rely on invertible mappings from latent to observed variables. In contrast, our approach does not
require such assumptions, offering greater flexibility.
Identifiability Analysis for LLMsSeveral prior studies (Marconato et al., 2024; Roeder et al., 2021) have explored
identifiability within the inference space, revealing alignments between representations obtained from distinct inference
models. However, these findings remain confined to the inference space and do not extend to identifying the true latent
variables in latent variable models. More recently, Jiang et al. (2024) examined the emergence of linear structures under a
different generative framework, attributing them to the implicit bias introduced by gradient-based optimization. In contrast,
our approach offers a theoretical explanation rooted in identifiability theory, directly linking the observed linear patterns
to the ground-truth latent structure. This shift in perspective provides a deeper and more principled understanding of the
underlying mechanisms.
Concept DiscoveryConcept discovery aims to extract human-interpretable concepts from pre-trained models, and has
emerged as a key area within machine learning (Schut et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Marconato et al., 2023; Oikarinen et al.,
2023; Koh et al., 2020; Schwalbe, 2022; Poeta et al., 2023; Taeb et al., 2022). While empirical methods have flourished,
theoretical understanding of when and how such concepts can be reliably identified remains limited. In contrast, the proposed
ConCA is grounded in rigorous theoretical results. The work of Leemann et al. (2023) investigates concept identifiability
under the assumption that the non-linear mapping is known a priori. In contrast, our results establish identifiability guarantees
without requiring such prior knowledge. A recent advance by Rajendran et al. (2024) offers formal identifiability results
for continuous latent concepts under a likelihood-matching framework, while our work focuses on discrete concepts, and
approaches the problem from a different angle, i.e., rooted in the next-token prediction paradigm, which underpins modern
LLMs training. This shift in both focus and framework allows us to derive new identifiability for the discrete setting.
14
Concept Component Analysis
B. Limitations and Discussion
Theoretical limitations.Our theoretical analysis in Theorem 2.2 relies on several assumptions, including the Diversity
Condition (i) and the Informational Sufficiency Condition (ii). While we provide justifications and argue that these
assumptions are likely mild in practice, they represent idealized conditions that may not hold exactly in real-world
datasets. Nonetheless, we believe they are reasonable: most have been introduced in prior work, and some, such as the
Informational Sufficiency Condition (ii), are already considered relaxations in previous identifiability analyses within the
causal representation learning community.
Methodological limitations.In addition, sparse ConCA applies regularization to recover concept-level posteriors, but
in practice we do not use the exponential function directly on ˆz≈[logp(z i|x)]zi. Instead, we employ exponential-like
activation functions, such as SELU ,SoftPlus , andELU, which approximate exponential behavior for small input values
while ensuring numerical stability and smooth gradients. As a result, the sparsity prior only approximately reflects true
posterior activation. Additionally, underdetermined settings ( ℓ > m ) and deviations from theoretical assumptions can lead
to multiple plausible solutions, some capturing noise rather than meaningful concepts.
Discussion.Despite the theoretical, methodological, and evaluation limitations discussed above, sparse ConCA provides a
principled framework for understanding and decomposing LLM representations at the concept level. The approach highlights
the potential of leveraging sparsity and structured priors to recover interpretable latent factors, even under underdetermined
settings or approximate assumptions. Furthermore, our work emphasizes the importance of carefully designed evaluation
frameworks, as concept-level recovery in natural language remains inherently challenging. We hope that these insights
will motivate future research to incorporate additional probabilistic constraints, explore alternative regularization strategies,
and develop larger and more diverse benchmarks to better evaluate and improve concept extraction methods in LLMs.
Ultimately, sparse ConCA serves as a starting point for building more interpretable, reliable, and theoretically grounded
tools for analyzing complex representations in LLM.
15
Concept Component Analysis
C. Comparison of the result in Liu et al. (2025a)
The theoretical result Theorem 2.2 in this work is totally different with that of Liu et al. (2025a). For comparison, here we
re-write the result in Liu et al. (2025a) as follows:
Theorem C.1(Liu et al. (2025a)).Suppose latent variables zand the observed variables xandyfollow the generative
models defined in Eq. 1, and assume thatztakes values in a finite set of cardinalityk. Assume the following holds:
(i)(Diversity Condition 1)There existQ
iki+ 1values of y, so that the matrix L= 
g(y=y 1)−g(y=y 0), ...,g(y=
yk)−g(y=y 0)
of sizeQ
iki×Q
ikiis invertible,
(ii)(Diversity Condition 2)There exist k+ 1 distinct values of y, i.e., y0,...,yk, such that the matrix ˆL= 
[p(z=z i|y=
y1)−p(z=z i|y=y 0)]zi, ...,[p(z=z i|y=y k)−p(z=z i|y=y 0)]zi
of the sizek×kis invertible
(iii) (Approximate Invertibility Condition)The mapping from zto(x, y) is approximately invertible in the sense that the
posterior p(z|x, y) is sharply peaked, i.e., there exists a most probable z∗such that p(z=z∗|x, y)≥1−ϵ for
someϵ∈[0,1)withϵ→0.
Then the true latent variables zare mathematically related to the representations in LLMs, i.e., f(x), which are learned
through the next-token prediction framework, by the following relationship:
f(x)≈A[logp(z=z i|x)]zi+b,(6)
whereA= ( ˆLT)−1L, andbis a bias vector.
It is worth emphasizing that the representation characterized in Theorem C.1, while allowing for linear unmixing, fundamen-
tally operates at the level ofjointlatent configurations, i.e., Eq. 6. Even if the mixing matrix were perfectly inverted, the
resulting representation would only recover logp(z|x) over the full configuration space. Such a representation does not
admit a direct concept-level interpretation, since recovering the marginal posterior of an individual latent concept requires
computing logp(z j|x) = logP
z−jp(zj,z−j|x), a nonlinear log-sum-exp operation that cannot, in general, be achieved
through linear unmixing of joint log-posteriors.
By contrast, our result establishes a strictly finer structure: the LLM representation f(x) is approximately a linear mixture
over themarginallog-posteriors of individual latent components,
f(x)≈A
logp(z 1|x), . . . ,logp(z ℓ|x)
+b.(7)
This explicit component-wise decomposition is crucial. Unlike joint-level representations, it implies that each latent
concept posterior p(zj|x)can be individually recovered through linear unmixing, enabling concept-level identifiability and
interpretability. More importantly, this structural characterization provides a direct methodological implication: to extract
interpretable concepts from LLMs, representation learning must operate in a space aligned with the marginal log-posterior
structure. The ConCA framework is designed precisely to satisfy this requirement. By explicitly modeling and unmixing
representations at the level of individual latent components, ConCA is not a heuristic design choice, but a principled
algorithmic realization of the structure implied by our theory.
16
Concept Component Analysis
D. Lemmas in the Context ofH(z|x)→0
For ease of exposition in the following sections, we first introduce the following lemmas.
Lemma D.1(Factorization of the Posterior as Conditional Entropy Vanishes).Suppose latent causal variables z=
(z1, . . . , z ℓ)and observed variablexfollow the causal generative model defined in Eq. 1. Then:
p(z|x)≈ℓY
i=1p(zi|x),asH(z|x)→0.(8)
Intuition.When H(z|x) = 0 , the observation xuniquely determines every coordinate zi, so no residual dependence
remains between them. If the conditional entropy is merely small, the remaining dependencies are weak and the posterior is
well-approximated byQ
ip(zi|x).
Proof.Define the product of marginals as:
q(z|x) :=ℓY
i=1p(zi|x).(9)
The Kullback–Leibler divergence betweenp(z|x)andq(z|x)is
DKL 
p(z|x)∥q(z|x)
=Ep(z|x)"
logp(z|x)
Qℓ
i=1p(zi|x)#
.(10)
Recall that conditional entropy satisfies
H(z|x) =−E p(z|x) logp(z|x),(11)
and similarly for each marginal,
H(zi|x) =−E p(zi|x)logp(z i|x).(12)
Thus,
DKL 
p(z|x)∥q(z|x)
=Ep(z|x)"
logp(z|x)−ℓX
i=1logp(z i|x)#
(13)
=−H(z|x)−ℓX
i=1Ep(z|x) [−logp(z i|x)](14)
=ℓX
i=1H(zi|x)−H(z|x),(15)
where we have used the law of total expectation to replaceE p(z|x) [−logp(z i|x)]byH(z i|x).
By the chain rule of entropy, for eachiwe have
H(z|x)−H(z i|x) =H(z −i|zi,x),(16)
wherez −idenotes all components exceptz i. Since entropy is non-negative for discrete case,
H(z|x)≥H(z i|x).(17)
Then, ifH(z|x)→0, we necessarily have
H(zi|x)→0,for alli= 1, . . . , ℓ.(18)
17
Concept Component Analysis
Combining the above,
DKL 
p(z|x)∥q(z|x)
=ℓX
i=1H(zi|x)−H(z|x)→0.(19)
Lemma D.2(Exact Linear Representation of Joint Log Posterior via Full Marginals).Let z= (z 1, . . . , z ℓ)∈ V 1× ··· × V ℓ
to be discrete, with zi∈ Vi,|Vi|=k i, i= 1, . . . , ℓ , then there exists a fixed (assignment-independent)selector matrix
S∈ {0,1}M×P
ikiwithM=Q
ikisuch that
[logp(z|x)] z≈S
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
,(20)
where the approximation becomes accurate as H(z|x)→0 (i.e., the posterior concentrates on a few high-probability
assignments). The j-th row of Sselects, for each i, the entry in
[logp(z 1|x)] z1, , . . . ,[logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
corresponding to
the value ofz iin thej-th joint assignmentz(j).
Intuition.The vector
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
stacks all single-variable log-posteriors. The selector
matrix Spicks, for each joint assignment, the corresponding entries in
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
so that
S
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
reconstructs the joint log-posterior [logp(z|x)] z. Under low conditional entropy
H(z|x)→0, only a few joint assignments dominate, making this approximation accurate.
Proof.LetM=Q
ikiand enumerate all joint assignments asVℓ={z(1), . . . ,z(M)}. Consider the vector
[logp(z|x)] z∈RM,(21)
whosej-th entry islogp(z(j)|x).
Step 1 (Factorization under low entropy).By Lemma D.1, asH(z|x)→0,
p(z|x)≈ℓY
i=1p(zi|x) =⇒logp(z(j)|x)≈ℓX
i=1logp(z(j)
i|x)(22)
wherez(j)
idenotes the value of thei-th latent variable in thej-th joint assignmentz(j).
Step 2 (Construction of selector matrix).Construct S∈ {0,1}M×P
ikiso that its j-th row has exactly one 1in each
block corresponding to variable zi, selecting the entry that corresponds to the value of ziinz(j), and all other entries in that
row are0.
Then for eachj,
(S
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
)j=ℓX
i=1logp(z(j)
i|x)≈logp(z(j)|x),(23)
so the linear map exactly reproduces the sum of marginal log-probabilities for the joint assignment.
Step 3 (Validity under low entropy).Because the posterior concentrates on a few high-probability assignments as
H(z|x)→0, the sum-of-marginals approximation is accurate for the entries corresponding to these assignments. Thus
[logp(z|x)] z≈S
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
,(24)
as claimed. The matrix Sis fixed (assignment-independent) and encodes the mapping from full marginal logs to joint-log
vector.
18
Concept Component Analysis
Lemma D.3(Expectation difference vanishes under posterior concentration).Let (z,x, y) follow a generative model with
discrete latent z. Assume that H(z|x)→0 . For any yi, y0, the conditional distributions satisfy: TV 
p(z|y i), p(z|
y0)
=olog(1−e−H(z|x))−1
(i.e., the Regularity Condition (iii)). Then, for anyy iandy 0,
Ep(z|y i)[logp(z|x)]−E p(z|y 0)[logp(z|x)]−→0asH(z|x)→0.(25)
Proof.Define
z∗(x)∈arg max
zp(z|x), m(x) := max
zp(z|x).(26)
For any discrete distributionq, it holds thatH(q)≥ −log∥q∥ ∞. Applying this top(z|x)yields
−logm(x)≤H(z|x), m(x)≥e−H(z|x).(27)
Hence,
1−m(x)≤1−e−H(z|x)−→0asH(z|x)→0.(28)
For anyy, write
hy(x) :=E p(z|y) [logp(z|x)] =X
zp(z|y) logp(z|x).(29)
Then
hyi(x)−h y0(x) =X
z 
p(z|y i)−p(z|y 0)
logp(z|x).(30)
By triangle inequality, we have
|hyi(x)−h y0(x)|=X
z 
p(z|y i)−p(z|y 0)
logp(z|x) (31)
≤X
zp(z|y i)−p(z|y 0)·logp(z|x) (32)
≤
max
zlogp(z|x)X
zp(z|y i)−p(z|y 0).(33)
Using the identityP
z|p(z)−q(z)|= 2 TV(p, q),we obtain
|hyi(x)−h y0(x)| ≤2 TV 
p(z|y i), p(z|y 0)
·max
zlogp(z|x).(34)
Since p(z∗|x) =m(x)→1 , we have |logp(z∗|x)|=|logm(x)| →0 . Hence the maximum of |logp(z|x)| is
attained on the complement z̸=z∗, whose total probability mass is 1−m(x) . Aszis discrete with finite support, there
existsz̸=z∗such thatp(z|x)≥(1−m(x)), which implies
max
z|logp(z|x)|≲|log(1−m(x))| ≤ |log(1−e−H(z|x))|.(35)
Therefore,
|hyi(x)−h y0(x)|≲2 TV 
p(z|y i), p(z|y 0)
|log(1−e−H(z|x))|.(36)
Under TV 
p(z|y i), p(z|y 0)
=o
1 log(1−e−H(z|x) )
., the right-hand side converges to zero as H(z|x)→0 ,
completing the proof.
19
Concept Component Analysis
E. Proof of Theorem 2.2
Theorem 2.1.Suppose latent variables zand the observed variables xandyfollow the generative models defined in Eq. 1.
Assume the following holds:
(i)(Diversity Condition)There exist m+ 1 values of y, so that the matrix L= 
g(y=y 1)−g(y=y 0), ...,g(y=
ym)−g(y=y 0)
of sizem×mis invertible,
(ii)(Informational Sufficiency Condition)The conditional entropy of the latent concepts given the context is close to zero,
i.e.,H(z|x)→0,
then the representations f(x) in LLMs, which are learned through the next-token prediction framework, are related to the
true latent variablesz, by the following relationship:
f(x)≈A
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
+b,(37)
whereAis am×(Pℓ
i=1ki)matrix,bis a bias vector.
Intuition.Each LLM representation f(x) encodes a combination of all latent concepts. Under the Diversity, observing
representations across multiple diverse outputs yprovides linearly independent constraints that reveal how all latent concepts
contribute together, i.e., the joint posterior. When the latent concepts are nearly determined by x, i.e., the Informational
Sufficiency Condition, the joint posterior decomposes into marginal posteriors, allowing f(x) to be expressed as a linear
mixture of the log-posteriors of individual concepts.
Proof. Recall that next-token prediction can be viewed as a multinomial logistic regression model, where the conditional
distribution is approximated as
p(y|x) =exp 
f(x)⊤g(y)
P
y′exp 
f(x)⊤g(y′).(38)
Here,f(x)andg(y)denote the learned representations ofxandy, respectively, both lying inRm.
On the other hard, under the latent-variable formulation in Eq. 1, the conditional distribution is given by marginalization:
p(y|x) =X
zp(y|z)p(z|x).(39)
Equating Eq. 38 and Eq. 39, we obtain
exp 
f(x)⊤g(y)
P
y′exp 
f(x)⊤g(y′)=X
zp(y|z)p(z|x).(40)
Taking logarithms on both sides, one arrives at
f(x)⊤g(y)−logZ(x) = logX
zp(y|z)p(z|x),(41)
whereZ(x) =P
y′exp(f(x)⊤g(y′))is the partition function.
We now focus on the right-hand side. Using Bayes’ rule and the conditional independence assumption y⊥x|z , we can
decompose:
logp(y|x) =E p(z|y)h
logp(y,z|x)
p(z|y,x)i
(42)
=Ep(z|y) [logp(z|x)] +E p(z|y) [logp(y|z)]−E p(z|y) [logp(z|y,x)].(43)
Combining Eq. 41 and Eq. 43, we arrive at
f(x)⊤g(y)−logZ(x) =E p(z|y) [logp(z|x)]−E p(z|y) [logp(z|y,x)] +b y,(44)
20
Concept Component Analysis
where we setb y:=E p(z|y) [logp(y|z)]for notational convenience.
For concreteness, let y0, y1, . . . , y mdenote the outcomes satisfying the diversity condition in condition (i). In particular, for
y=y 0we have
f(x)⊤g(y0)−logZ(x) =X
zp(z|y 0) logp(z|x)−h y0+by0,(45)
withh y0:=P
zp(z|y 0) logp(z|y 0,x). Similarly, fory=y 1,
f(x)⊤g(y1)−logZ(x) =X
zp(z|y 1) logp(z|x)−h y1+by1.(46)
Subtracting Eq. equation 45 from Eq. equation 46, we obtain
 
g(y1)−g(y 0)⊤f(x) =X
z 
p(z|y 1)−p(z|y 0)
logp(z|x)
−(h y1−hy0) + (b y1−by0).(47)
Since ycan take m+ 1 distinct values, Eq. 47 yields mlinearly independent equations. Collecting them together, we obtain
 
fy(y1)−f y(y0), . . . ,f y(yℓ)−f y(y0)⊤
| {z }
L⊤fx(x)(48)
= 
[p(z|y 1)−p(z|y 0)]z, . . . ,[p(z|y ℓ)−p(z|y 0)]z⊤
| {z }
ˆL[logp(z|x)] z
−[h y1−hy0, . . . , h yℓ−hy0]| {z }
hy+ [by1−by0, . . . , b yℓ−by0]| {z }
by.(49)
By the diversity condition, the matrixL∈Rm×mis invertible. Hence we can solve forf x(x):
fx(x) = (L⊤)−1ˆL[logp(z|x)] z−(L⊤)−1hy+ (L⊤)−1by|{z}
b.(50)
Then, asH(z|x)→0, by lemmas D.2 and D.3, we have:
fx(x) = (L⊤)−1ˆL S
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
| {z }
by Lemma C.2−(L⊤)−1hy|{z}
by Lemma C.3,→0+b.(51)
Finally, definingA= (L⊤)−1ˆLScompletes the proof.
21
Concept Component Analysis
F. Justification for Log-Posterior Estimation via Linear Probing
Corollary 3.1.Suppose Theorem 2.1 holds, i.e.,
f(x)≈A
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
+b.(52)
Letx0andx1be two counterfactual samples that differ only in the i-th latent concept zi, each with its own ground-truth label.
Then the corresponding representations (f(x 0),f(x 1))are linearly separable with respect to these labels. In particular,
there exists a weight matrix Wsuch that W˜A(i)≈I, and the associated logits recover the marginal posterior [p(zi|x)] zi
over all possible values of zi. In the context where ziis binary, the logits reduce to a two-dimensional vector, and the
softmax recovers the marginal posteriorp(z i= 0|x),or equivalently,p(z i= 1|x) = 1−p(z i= 0|x).
Intuition.The key idea is that each latent concept contributes to the representation along a distinct linear direction.
Changing only one concept shifts the representation along its direction, so a simple linear classifier can isolate this change
and recover the marginal posterior. For binary concepts, this reduces to a one-dimensional separation, while for multi-class
concepts, each class corresponds to its own direction.
Proof.Consider the approximation
f(x)≈Ag(x) +b,g(x) =
[logp(z 1|x)] z1;. . .; [logp(z ℓ|x)] zℓ
.
For the counterfactual samples x0andx1differing only in zi, we pass the representations into a linear classifier with weights
W. The classifier produces logits
logits≈W 
Ag(x) +b
,(53)
wherelogitsis a vector over all possible values ofz i. In the binary case, this is a two-dimensional vector
[logp(z i= 0|x),logp(z i= 1|x)]⊤,
and in the multi-class case, it contains one entry per category.
For correct classification under cross-entropy loss, the logits should recover the log-posterior for all categories (up to an
additive constant):
logits=
logp(z i=k|x)
k+const,(54)
wherekindexes all possible values ofz i, and the constant does not affect the softmax output.
Comparing equation 53 and equation 54, we require
W˜A(i)≈I,(55)
where ˜A(i)is the block of columns of Aassociated with all possible values of zi. This condition ensures that the classifier
isolates the contribution fromz iand produces the correct logits.
Binary case:When ziis binary, ˜A(i)has two columns, and the logits reduce to a two-dimensional vector [logp(z i= 0|
x),logp(z i= 1|x)]⊤. After softmax, we directly obtain the marginal posterior
p(zi= 0|x), p(z i= 1|x) = 1−p(z i= 0|x).
Therefore, the counterfactual pair (x0,x1)is linearly separable with respect to their ground-truth labels in both the general
multi-class and binary cases.
22
Concept Component Analysis
G. Experimental Details
Training DataFor all experiments, we use pre-trained LLMs downloaded from https://huggingface.co/ ,
including Pythia-70m, 1.4b, 2.8b (Biderman et al., 2023), Gemma3-1b (Team et al., 2025), and Qwen3-1.7b (Team, 2025).
LLM representations are extracted from these models using the first 200 million tokens of the Pile dataset, obtained
from https://huggingface.co/datasets/EleutherAI/the_pile_deduplicated (Gao et al., 2020).
For each token, we record the corresponding representation from the model’s last hidden layer, aligned with Theorem 2.2.
These pre-extracted representations form the training data for the proposed sparse ConCA and SAEs.
Table 2.Counterfactual concept pairs used for evaluation, adapted from Park et al. (2023).
#Concept Example Word Pair Counts
Verb inflections
1 verb−→3pSg (accept, accepts) 50
2 verb−→Ving (add, adding) 50
3 verb−→Ved (accept, accepted) 50
4 Ving−→3pSg (adding, adds) 50
5 Ving−→Ved (adding, added) 50
6 3pSg−→Ved (adds, added) 50
7 verb−→V + able (accept, acceptable) 50
8 verb−→V + er (begin, beginner) 50
9 verb−→V + tion (compile, compilation) 50
10 verb−→V + ment (agree, agreement) 50
Adjective transformations
11 adj−→un + adj (able, unable) 50
12 adj−→adj + ly (according, accordingly) 50
21 adj−→comparative (bad, worse) 87
22 adj−→superlative (bad, worst) 87
23 frequent−→infrequent (bad, terrible) 86
Size, thing, noun
13 small−→big (brief, long) 25
14 thing−→color (ant, black) 50
15 thing−→part (bus, seats) 50
16 country−→capital (Austria, Vienna) 158
17 pronoun−→possessive (he, his) 4
18 male−→female (actor, actress) 52
19 lower−→upper (always, Always) 73
20 noun−→plural (album, albums) 100
Language translations
24 English−→French (April, avril) 116
25 French−→German (ami, Freund) 128
26 French−→Spanish (annee, año) 180
27 German−→Spanish (Arbeit, trabajo) 228
Testing Data for Results in Figures 2 and 3.For evaluation, we use counterfactual text pairs that differ in only a single
concept while keeping all other aspects unchanged. We emphases again that constructing such pairs is challenging due to
the complexity of natural language, as also highlighted in Park et al. (2023); Jiang et al. (2024). We adopt 27 high-precision
counterfactual concepts from Park et al. (2023), derived from the Big Analogy Test dataset (Gladkova et al., 2016), as our
testing dataset. Table 2 lists the 27 concepts, one illustrative pair per concept, and the number of pairs used for evaluation.
Despite its modest size, this benchmark suffices to meaningfully distinguish method performance and validate the sensitivity
of our evaluation framework.
23
Concept Component Analysis
Algorithm 1Evaluation of SAE/ConCA Concepts via Supervised Linear Classification
Require:Trained SAEs/ConCA, 27 counterfactual pairs{x i}27
i=1
Ensure:Mean Pearson correlation between SAE features and concept logits
1:Step 1: Obtain concept logits
2:fori= 1to27do
3:Train LogisticRegression on thei-th counterfactual pair
4:Compute logits i=logit(ck= 1|f(x i))
5:end for
6:Stack logits to forms= (s 1, s2, . . . , s 27)
7:Step 2: Extract SAEs and ConCA latent features
8:fori= 1to27do
9:Passf(x i)through SAE to get latentˆ z i
10:Compute element-wise exponentiation ˜zi= exp(ˆ z i)
11:end for
12:Stack features to form ˜z∈R27×D
13:Step 3: Compute correlation matrix
14:ford= 1toDdo
15:Compute Pearson correlationR d=C(s, ˜z:,d)(Ddenotes SAEs/ConCA’s feature dimension)
16:end for
17:Step 4: Solve assignment problem
18:Apply Hungarian algorithm onRto obtain optimal assignment.
19:Compute assigned Pearson correlations
20:Step 5: Aggregate metric
21:Report mean Pearson correlation across the 27 concepts.
Testing Data for Downsteam Tasks in Figure 5.For the few-show learning setting in Figure 5, we leverage a previously
collected set of 113 binary classification datasets from Kantamneni et al. (2025), covering diverse tasks including challenging
cases such as front-page headline detection and logical entailment. Each dataset provides prompts and binary targets (0 or
1), with prompt lengths ranging from 5 to 1024 tokens. Refer to Table 3 in Kantamneni et al. (2025) for details. For the
out-of-distribution task in Figure 5, we also leverage 8 datasets from Kantamneni et al. (2025). These include: These include:
2 preexisting GLUE-X datasets designed as “extreme” versions of tasks testing grammaticality and logical entailment, 3
datasets with altered language, i.e., Tanslated to Frech, Spanish, and German, and 3 datasets with syntactic modifications
substitutions of names (Fictional Characters, Random Letter Inserted, and Reversed Name Order) with cartoon characters.
Probes are trained in standard settings and evaluated on these out-of-distribution test examples. Both two dataset can be
downloaded fromhttps://github.com/JoshEngels/SAE-Probes/tree/main.
Training Pipeline.All ConCA and SAE variants use a feature dimension of 215, based on empirical settings from sparse
SAEs. They are trained for 20,000 optimization steps with a batch size of 10,000, using the Adam optimizer with an initial
learning rate of 1×10−4and a linear warm-up over the first 200 steps. For the top- kand batch-top- kSAEs, kis set to
32. P-annealing SAEs incorporate a sparsity warm-up of 400 steps with an initial sparsity penalty coefficient 0.1. All
experiments are run on a server equipped with 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs.
Pearson correlation coefficientWe use the PCC as the evaluation metric, as described in experiments. Algorithm 1
summarizes the procedure: for each of the 27 counterfactual concept pairs, we first obtain concept logits using a supervised
linear classifier. The same inputs are then passed through the trained SAE to extract latent features, which are exponentiated
and stacked into a feature matrix. We compute the Pearson correlation between each SAE feature and the corresponding
concept logit, and solve the assignment problem using the Hungarian algorithm to account for permutation indeterminacy.
The mean Pearson correlation across all concepts is reported as the final evaluation score.
AUC.The Area Under the Curve (AUC) is used to evaluate the performance of a binary classifier for concept prediction.
The ROC curve plots the True Positive Rate (TPR) against the False Positive Rate (FPR) at different threshold levels,
illustrating the trade-off between correctly predicting positive instances and incorrectly predicting negative instances. The
24
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 6.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [3pSg
- Ved] ,[adj - adj + ly] , and[adj - comparative] . For each concept, the top-32 features with highest differences are
selected, and points show the fraction of features exhibiting significant changes (mean ± std across seeds). Higher fractions indicate more
variant features.
AUC measures the total area under this curve, ranging from 0 to 1. An AUC of 1.0 indicates perfect classification, 0.5
corresponds to random guessing, and values closer to 0 indicate poor performance. This metric provides an aggregate,
threshold-independent measure of the classifier’s ability to discriminate between the two classes.
Linear Probing in Downstream Tasks.In our few-shot experiments, we first apply different SAEs and ConCA variants
to the representations of pretrained LLMs to obtain feature embeddings. We then train a logistic regression classifier (using
the LogisticRegression implementation from the scikit-learn package) on these features with limited labeled examples. To
mitigate overfitting given the high dimensionality of the features, we employ an L2 penalty and select the regularization
strength through cross-validation. In our out-of-distribution shift experiments, we again train a logistic regression classifier
on the extracted features. To avoid overfitting to the in-distribution validation split, we fix the regularization strength to its
default value (i.e., C=1.0 in LogisticRegression) instead of tuning it via cross-validation. This ensures a fairer and more
stable evaluation under distribution shift.
H. Visualization of Counterfactual Pair Experiments
To more clearly illustrate the advantages of the proposed ConCAs, we perform a visualization analysis based on features
extracted by ConCA and SAE variants from counterfactual pairs. Specifically, we first select the top 32 ( kin top- k) features
with the highest average absolute difference between a counterfactual pair, focusing on the most significant variations while
avoiding dilution from less responsive features. We then compute the rank-based fraction of significant features over these
32 features across multiple thresholds to ensure robustness.The fraction measures the proportion of selected features
exhibiting significant changes, providing a metric of feature sensitivity and stability in response to a single concept change.
Intuitively, if the learned features are expected to capture a single concept as much as possible, their responses should be
small—that is, the fraction will be low.The results are visualized using scatter plots with mean and standard deviation to
capture both distribution and central tendency. This analysis highlights how ConCAs capture selective and meaningful
feature variations, complementing the quantitative metrics reported earlier. For GroupNorm, we apply the same procedure
independently within each group. That is, the 32 selection and rank-based fraction calculation are performed per group, and
the final metric is obtained by averaging across all groups. This ensures that group-level normalization does not interfere
across groups, making the evaluation consistent for GroupNorm settings. Algorithm 2 summarizes the procedure.
Figures 4, 6–13 show the rank-based fraction of significant features for the proposed ConCA and SAE variants across
27 counterfactual pairs, on Pythia-2.8b. The LayerNorm configuration exhibits the smallest fractions, indicating more
stable or less variant feature changes under counterfactual conditions. In contrast, the Batch-Topk and Topk SAE variants
produce larger fractions, reflecting more variable feature responses. BatchNorm and Panneal configurations display similar
intermediate behavior. Overall, these trends are broadly aglined with the MPC results shown in Figure 3.
I. Visualization of Classification Tasks
To better understand why ConCA features transfer effectively under the few-shot setting, we visualize the features extracted
by the proposed ConCA and SAEs variants from test data using t-SNE. By projecting all features into 2D space, we
can observe the structure and separability of learned representations, providing intuition for the superior downstream
25
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 7.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [English
- French],[French - German], and[French - Spanish].
Figure 8.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [frequent
- infrequent],[German - Spanish], and[lower - upper].
Figure 9.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [male -
female],[noun - plural], and[pronoun - possessive].
Figure 10.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [small -
big],[thing - color], and[thing - part].
26
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 11.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [verb -
3pSg],[verb - V + able], and[verb - V + er].
Figure 12.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [verb -
V + ment],[verb - V + tion], and[verb - Ved].
Figure 13.Rank-based fraction of significant features for SAE and ConCA variants across three counterfactual pair concepts: [verb -
Ving],[Ving - Ved], and[Ving - Ved].
27
Concept Component Analysis
Algorithm 2Compute Rank-Based Fraction of Significant Features for Counterfactual Pairs
Require:Features of counterfactual pair(z s,zt),k,normalization, number of groupsG
Ensure:Fraction of significant features
1:Compute element-wise absolute difference:diff=|z s−zt|
2:ifnormalization== "Group"then
3:Splitdiff,z s,ztintoGgroups
4:forg= 1toGdo
5:Select top-k g= max(1, k/G)elements in groupgbased ondiff
6:Convert group featureszg
s,zg
tto percentile ranks
7:Compute absolute rank differences for top-k gelements
8:Evaluate significance across multiple thresholdsT={0.1,0.2,0.3,0.4,0.5}
9:Compute average fraction of significant features for groupg
10:end for
11:Average fractions across groups to obtain overall fraction
12:else
13:Select top-kelements globally based ondiff
14:Convert selected featuresz s,ztto percentile ranks
15:Compute absolute rank differences for top-kelements
16:Evaluate significance across multiple thresholdsT={0.1,0.2,0.3,0.4,0.5}
17:Compute average fraction of significant features
18:end if
RETURN: Overall fraction of significant features
performance of ConCA compared to SAE variants. Figure 14 provides t-SNE visualization (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) of
features of testing data, extracted by SAE and ConCA variants, on a example of the few-shot task, which shows that ConCA
configurations (e.g., LayerNorm, BatchNorm, GroupNorm) produce more compact and well-separated clusters, indicating
more stable and discriminative representations compared to SAE variants.
J. Acknowledgment of LLMs
We acknowledge that large language models (LLMs) were used in this work only for word-level tasks, including correcting
typos, improving grammar, and refining phrasing. No substantive content, results, or scientific interpretations were generated
by LLMs. All scientific ideas, analyses, and conclusions presented in this manuscript are solely the work of the authors.
K. Practical Diagnostic for the Diversity Condition
The diversity condition in our theory requires that the model’s output space contains enough linearly independent directions.
Although the assumption is existential (it only requires that there exists such a set of output tokens), it is useful to provide an
empirical procedure showing that modern LLMs indeed offer sufficiently diverse outputs. Since exhaustively checking all
possible token combinations is infeasible, we design a practical proxy that searches for a diverse subset of outputs.
We begin by randomly sampling a large set of candidate tokens from the model’s vocabulary. One token is chosen as a
reference output. For each remaining candidate, we compute the difference between its output embedding and that of the
reference token. These differences represent all available output directions relative to the reference. To find a subset of tokens
whose directions are as independent as possible, we apply a greedy selection procedure based on LU decomposition with
pivoting. This method reorders the candidate directions in decreasing order of their contribution to the overall dimensionality.
Taking the first 2,048 directions (for Pythia-12B) yields a set of outputs that spans the most independent subspace available
within the candidate pool. We then assess how diverse this selected set actually is by measuring the spectrum of singular
values derived from the chosen directions. A well-spread singular-value spectrum indicates that the selected outputs span a
nearly full-dimensional space.
Across all model sizes, the spectra exhibit a consistent pattern. The largest several hundred singular values remain high and
decay smoothly, indicating that each model provides a substantial number of independent output directions. As the index
28
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 14.Visualization of features extracted by SAE and ConCA variants on a example of few-shot classification task datasets. Each
point represents a test sample, colored by its class label. ConCA configurations (e.g., LayerNorm, BatchNorm, GroupNorm) produce
more compact and well-separated clusters, indicating more stable and discriminative representations compared to SAE variants.
Figure 15.Singular-value spectra of the greedily selected output-difference matrix across Pythia-70m, Pythia-1.4B, and Pythia-2.8B. Each
curve plots the log-scale singular values (largest to smallest) obtained from a large candidate pool of output tokens using LU-pivoting
selection. The spectra decay smoothly and only collapse in the final few dimensions, indicating that each model provides a numerically
full-rank set of output directions and that the diversity assumption can be approximately satisfied in practice.
29
Concept Component Analysis
approaches the effective dimensionality of the model, the tail of the spectrum gradually drops, but only the final few singular
values approach very small magnitudes. This behavior suggests that the selected output directions nearly span the model’s
representational space and are far from the rank-deficient structure we observe when tokens are selected at random.
Interestingly, the point at which the spectrum begins to decline sharply shifts with model scale (See Figure 15): larger
models (1.4B and above) maintain strong singular values for a greater proportion of directions compared to the 70m variant.
This reflects the natural trend that larger models encode richer and more varied output embeddings. Nevertheless, even the
70m model remains numerically full-rank down to its final few dimensions.
L. Informational Sufficiency Diagnostics
Our theory requires an informational sufficiency condition: the learned representation should contain enough information to
reliably determine the related latent concept. For binary latent factors, this means the posterior distribution over the factor
should be sharply peaked given the representation. Although this assumption is mild and standard in representation analyses,
it is useful to provide a practical diagnostic showing that LLMs indeed satisfy it. We use the constructed 27 counterfactual
concept pairs as mentioned in Table 2. These pairs cover a broad variety of concept types while keeping each concept
operationally well-defined.
For each concept pair, we gather a list of word pairs exhibiting the target transformation. We extract last-token representations
from the model for each word, forming two embedding sets corresponding to the two concept values. We then train a linear
probe (logistic regression) to classify the target concept using 70/30 train–test splits repeated with three random seeds. The
linear probe is intentionally simple: rather than maximising accuracy, its role is to estimate an empirical distribution p(z|x) ,
allowing us to measure the uncertainty the representation leaves about the concept.
To quantify how well the representation specifies the latent concept, we compute the conditional entropy of the probe’s
predicted distribution over the concept: entropy near 0 bits indicates that the representation almost perfectly determines the
concept; entropy near 1 bit corresponds to complete uncertainty (uniform prediction).
Across the 27 evaluated concepts (See Figure 16), we observe a clear and consistent trend: larger Pythia models yield
substantially lower conditional entropy, indicating increasingly informative representations. The 70M model shows moderate
informational sufficiency (typically 0.1–0.3 bits, with a few harder concepts higher), while the 1.4B and 2.8B models exhibit
uniformly low entropies (mostly below 0.15 bits). This pattern suggests that, at the model scales relevant for our theoretical
analysis, the representations almost deterministically encode the target concept. Consequently, the informational-sufficiency
(approximate invertibility) assumption is empirically well supported.
M. Synthetic validation of marginal vs. joint identifiability.
To complement our theoretical discussion in Appendix C, and also compare our ConCA and SAEs, we design a synthetic
experiment as follow. We begin by sampling 5 binary latent variables whose causal dependencies follow an Erd ˝os–Rényi
(ER) random directed acyclic graph (DAG). Each graph is drawn with an expected number of edges equal to 10. For every
node in the DAG, we define a conditional distribution over its parents using a Bernoulli model whose parameters are sampled
uniformly from the interval [0.2,0.8]. We also generate counterfactual data that only in one latent variable while keeping the
remains unchanged, to train base model and also train linear probing as evaluation. To simulate a nonlinear mixture process,
we then convert the latent variable samples into one-hot format and randomly apply a permutation matrix to the one-hot
encoding, generating one-hot observed samples. These are then transformed into binary observed samples. To simulate
next-token prediction, we randomly mask a part of the binary observed data, e.g.„ xi, and predict it by use the remaining
portion x\i. After training, we obtain the learned representations. Note that we set the representation dimension to 10 (i.e.,
component-wise posterior corresponds to 2×5 ) in order to highlight the difference between our theoretical result and the
formulation in (Liu et al., 2025a), which requires a representation dimension of 32 (i.e., joint posterior corresponds to25).
Given the above setup, our first experiment aims to highlight the difference between our theoretical result and the formulation
in (Liu et al., 2025a). To this end, we train a linear probe on the learned representations (as justified by Corollary 3.1). The
probe achieves a classification accuracy of 0.923 (std: 0.021). This demonstrates that 2×5 dimensional representations
are already sufficient for linear classification, and that 25dimensional representations required by Liu et al. (2025a) are
unnecessary, thereby empirically supporting our theoretical result in Theorem 2.2.
Our second experiment is to verify the performance of our ConCA and SAEs on the learned representations. To this end,
30
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 16.Conditional entropy for the 27 concept pairs across three Pythia model scales (70m, 1.4b, 2.8b). Lower entropy indicates that
the representation more sharply determines the underlying concept. As model size increases, entropies consistently decrease—especially
for non-trivial semantic contrasts—illustrating that informational sufficiency (approximate invertibility) emerges naturally.
31
Concept Component Analysis
Activation Type Clamp Range Pearson↑MSE↓
Exp[−20,20] 0.7029±0.0081 10.59±2.10
Exp[−30,30] 0.7055±0.0148 11.18±0.85
Exp[−40,40] 0.7020±0.0077 11.03±0.97
Exp[−50,50] 0.7006±0.0018 10.65±0.55
SoftPlus (ours)—0.7324±0.0002 7.63±0.40
Table 3.Performance comparison of exponential and SoftPlus activation variants under clamped toy settings. SoftPlus achieves consistently
higher Pearson correlation and lower MSE, even when the exponential is artificially stabilized.
we train SAEs (Panneal), and ConCA (LayerNorm). We compute Pearson correlation between logits obtained by linear
probing trained on counterfactual pair, and features obtained by SAEs and ConCA. The results are as follows: ConCA:
0.813 (std: 0.031) SAEs: 0.635 (std: 0.046). We emphasize that the scope of this work focuses on the theoretical guarantee
in Theorem 2.1, which addresses identifiability up to the linear mixtures. Achieving unique recovery of individual concepts
is substantially challenging. While additional assumptions, such as sparsity conditions familiar from compressed sensing,
can in principle support uniqueness, it remains unclear whether the mixing matrix Ain our setting satisfies the specific
sparsity or incoherence conditions required. Exploring these assumptions is an interesting direction for future work.
N. Verifying Exponential Substitutes on Pythia-70m
A core modeling choice in ConCA is the replacement of the exponential function with numerically stable surrogates such as
SoftPlus, motivated by the fact that LLM activations lie in ranges that make the true exponential function prone to gradient
explosion and instability. To further validate this design choice, we conduct an additional controlled experiment where the
exponential function becomes numerically stable.
Specifically, we construct a toy setting by clamping the final-layer hidden activations of Pythia-70m to bounded ranges
where exponential function can be safely evaluated without numerical overflow. We consider the four clamping windows as
shown in Table 3. We additionally include LayerNorm and the same sparsity penalty used in our SoftPlus variant to ensure
comparability. We then train ConCA variants using the true exponential under these artificially stabilized conditions, and
compare them with our SoftPlus-based variant. Performance is evaluated using both Pearson correlation (between recovered
concepts and linear-probe ground truth) and MSE reconstruction error.
Three observations emerge: Exp becomes usable only under artificial clamping. Even when stabilized, exp-based ConCA
exhibits lower Pearson correlation ( 0.69–0.72) and higher MSE ( 10–12) across all clamp settings. SoftPlus consistently
outperforms exp, achieving both the highest correlation ( 0.73) and the lowest MSE ( 7–8), despite being evaluated under
more challenging, unclamped activation distributions. Together, these findings demonstrate that the surrogate activations
used in ConCA are not only numerically safer but also better aligned with empirical behavior, even in settings explicitly
constructed to favor the exponential function. This experiment thus reinforces our modeling choice and supports the
theoretical motivation behind replacing exp in ConCA.
O. Activation Patching Evaluation
Activation patching is widely regarded as one of the strongest tests of functional interpretability. Unlike reconstruction-based
metrics (e.g., MSE) or alignment metrics (e.g., Pearson correlation), activation patching directly measures whether a
representation—after being encoded and reconstructed by a concept-extraction model—still leads the LLM to make similar
token-level predictions. To evaluate this, we measure how substituting an internal hidden state with its ConCA/SAE
reconstruction affects the LLM’s output logits. If a dictionary model faithfully captures the underlying functional structure,
the LLM’s predictions should remain largely unchanged.
We use 10k randomly sampled token activations from The Pile activation dataset of Pythia-70m. Sampling is performed
once, cached, and reused across models to ensure perfect comparability. For each sampled activation, we: 1: feed the
original hidden state into the model’s final prediction layer to obtain the baseline logits. 2: reconstruct the hidden state using
either our ConCA or SAEs. 3: feed the reconstructed activation back into the model and compare the resulting logits with
the baseline. We report three widely used functional metrics: Argmax Match: whether the top predicted token stays the
32
Concept Component Analysis
Figure 17.Activation patching comparison across ConCA and SAE variants on Pythia-70M using 10,000 cached hidden activations
from The Pile. (a) Argmax Match (higher is better): ConCA variants preserve the model’s top prediction more reliably than SAE
baselines. (b) Top-10 Overlap (higher is better): ConCA reconstructions retain substantially more of the model’s predictive structure. (c)
Jensen–Shannon Divergence (lower is better): ConCA achieves lower distributional distortion, indicating higher functional faithfulness.
Figure 18.Pearson correlation and MSE between predicted concept logits and matched dictionary features across model scales (Pythia-
70M, 1.4B, 2.8B) and dictionary learning methods. Mean ± standard deviation over three random seeds is shown. ConCA variants achieve
higher Pearson correlation than SAE baselines, with the performance gap most visible in smaller models and remaining stable as scale
increases.
same. Top-10 Overlap: fraction of overlapping tokens in the top-10 predictions. Jensen–Shannon Divergence: distributional
distance between original and reconstructed logits (lower is better). Each metric is averaged over all 10,000 activations.
The results in Figure 17 show that ConCA-BatchNorm achieves the best overall performance across metrics. SAE-top-k and
SAE-batch-top-k show the largest divergence, indicating functional mismatch despite good sparsity. ConCA variants exhibit
lower variance, suggesting more stable behavior across diverse activations. This experiment demonstrates that: ConCA
reconstructions lead the LLM to make more similar predictions, confirming that ConCA retains functional information more
faithfully than SAEs.
P. Experiments on Additional Counterfactual Concept Pairs
While the original 27 counterfactual concept pairs from Park et al. (2023) provide clean, expert-curated evaluations along
several core linguistic axes (verb inflections, adjective morphology, noun attributes, and multilingual translations), they
cover only a small portion of the semantic space relevant to modern LLM behavior. In particular, many practically important
concepts, such as sentiment polarity, toxicity, factuality, stance, politeness, or degree/intensity—are not represented in the
original benchmark. These dimensions are widely studied in interpretability and safety research, and their inclusion offers a
more comprehensive evaluation of concept alignment.
To complement the original dataset, we construct 23 additional counterfactual concept pairs, each designed to capture a
single semantic concept for linear probing and our theoretical disentanglement analysis. For every concept, we curate 50
pairs where only the targeted semantic attribute changes while all other factors (POS category, morphological structure,
lexical frequency, etc.) remain controlled.
These new concepts span five broader semantic families—sentiment polarity, toxicity/politeness, factuality/truthfulness,
stance/subjectivity, and degree/intensity—and are summarized in Table 4. Importantly, the pairs were constructed to satisfy
the same identifiability constraints emphasized in our main text: each pair differs in one concept, preventing confounding
correlations across multiple latent factors. This makes the dataset suitable both for linear probing and for measuring
concept-level disentanglement.
A concise overview of the 23 added concepts is provided (full list and examples in Table 4). Overall, the results in the left
33
Concept Component Analysis
in Figure 18 show that the ConCA variants demonstrate substantially stronger alignment than standard SAE baselines. In
Pythia-70M, ConCA methods outperform SAEs by a large margin, indicating more faithful feature extraction in low-capacity
language models. As model size increases to 1.4B and 2.8B, all methods improve, but ConCA retains a consistent advantage:
LayerNorm-ConCA yields the highest and most stable correlations across scales, followed closely by GroupNorm and
BatchNorm. In contrast, SAE-Top-k and Batch-Top-k lag significantly behind, and Panneal improves with scale but remains
below ConCA. These results indicate that ConCA’s normalization-driven design leads to more stable and interpretable
feature learning, particularly in smaller models where dictionary training is more brittle.
Q. Detailed Results of Figure 3
While Figure 3 includes error bands reflecting variability across random seeds, many of these standard deviations are
extremely small and therefore not visually distinguishable in the plots. To make these differences explicit, we report the full
numerical mean and std values for each method–model pair in Tables 5 and 6.
R. Relation with Linear Representation Hypothesis
In Theorem 2.1, the mixing matrix Aoffers a way to interpret how latent semantic information may be organized within the
representation space of LLMs. At a high level, Acan be viewed as describing how the log-posteriors of latent concepts
might be linearly combined inside hidden activations. This perspective is related to the broaderLinear Representation
Hypothesis, which suggests that certain semantic attributes in neural representations may interact in an approximately linear
manner.
Under this view, each column of Amay be interpreted as indicating a possible direction associated with a particular latent
factor, while differences across rows could correspond to the kinds ofdifference vectorsoften observed in counterfactual
pairs or steering-vector analyses. In particular, when two inputs differ only in one latent concept, their representation
difference may align with the corresponding column of A, reminiscent of the vector arithmetic phenomena discussed in
both word embeddings and modern LLMs.
Such observations hint that Amay induce a geometric structure in which examples sharing similar latent concept values
tend to cluster along certain affine subspaces, while changes in concept values correspond to movement along interpretable
directions. From this perspective, the mixing matrix provides a possible explanation for why linear unmixing methods like
ConCA can recover meaningful concept-level variations in practice. Of course, these interpretations are exploratory, and
the precise geometric structure may depend on various factors such as model architecture, data distribution, and training
objective.
34
Concept Component Analysis
Table 4.Additional counterfactual concept pairs (sentiment, toxicity, factuality/truthfulness, stance, politeness). Each concept contains 50
pairs.
#Concept Example Pair Word Pair Counts
Sentiment polarity
1 positive→negative (happy, sad) 50
2 positive→neutral (amazing, average) 50
3 negative→neutral (terrible, ordinary) 50
Toxicity
4 toxic→neutral (stupid, silly) 50
5 toxic→polite (idiot, friend) 50
6 rude→polite (shut up, please speak) 50
Factuality / Truthfulness
7 true→false (earth, flat-earth) 50
8 factual→nonfactual (oxygen, magic-power) 50
9 real→fictional (doctor, wizard) 50
Stance / Subjectivity
10 supportive→opposed (agree, oppose) 50
11 approving→disapproving (praise, blame) 50
12 subjective→objective (biased, neutral) 50
Politeness / Formality
13 polite→impolite (sorry, shut-up) 50
14 formal→informal (assist, help) 50
15 respectful→disrespectful (sir, dude) 50
Emotion / Tone
16 calm→angry (calm, furious) 50
17 excited→bored (excited, uninterested) 50
18 friendly→hostile (friendly, hostile) 50
Intensity / Degree
19 mild→strong (warm, hot) 50
20 weak→strong (soft, solid) 50
21 low-certainty → high-
certainty(maybe, definitely) 50
Common semantic axes
22 general→specific (animal, dog) 50
23 concrete→abstract (chair, justice) 50
35
Concept Component Analysis
Method Model Pearson (MPC) MSE
BatchNorm pythia-70m0.6500±0.00552 8.3305±4.10287
pythia-1.4b0.7543±0.00004 1.6418±0.00135
pythia-2.8b0.7630±0.00132 2.4657±0.04794
GroupNorm pythia-70m0.7285±0.00094 9.0071±1.36961
pythia-1.4b0.7914±0.00222 6.3021±0.09493
pythia-2.8b0.8038±0.00059 7.1652±0.30648
LayerNorm pythia-70m0.7325±0.00015 7.6272±0.40461
pythia-1.4b0.7958±0.00009 5.2756±0.09484
pythia-2.8b0.8074±0.00178 3.5708±0.45880
Batch-TopK pythia-70m0.5687±0.00691 24.6165±0.10317
pythia-1.4b0.6856±0.00205 24.3850±0.08773
pythia-2.8b0.7037±0.00211 23.7690±0.07034
TopK pythia-70m0.5851±0.01090 22.9035±0.03389
pythia-1.4b0.6969±0.00399 22.7108±0.10553
pythia-2.8b0.7074±0.00810 22.5243±0.03869
Panneal pythia-70m0.6474±0.00816 7.7097±0.08165
pythia-1.4b0.7413±0.00234 5.7218±0.08165
pythia-2.8b0.7613±0.00205 6.3563±0.03300
Table 5.Comparison of Pearson correlation (MPC) and MSE across normalization methods and Pythia model scales. Each cell reports
mean ± standard deviation over random seeds.
Method Model Pearson (MPC) MSE
BatchNorm Qwen3-1.7B0.7281±0.00050 3.3193±0.00026
gemma-3-1b-pt0.6853±0.00374 1.5604±0.00057
pythia-1.4b0.7543±0.00004 1.6418±0.00135
GroupNorm Qwen3-1.7B0.7979±0.00023 6.1347±0.00051
gemma-3-1b-pt0.7791±0.00123 6.5240±0.05917
pythia-1.4b0.7914±0.00222 6.3021±0.09493
LayerNorm Qwen3-1.7B0.7900±0.00034 5.9607±0.05288
gemma-3-1b-pt0.7738±0.00019 6.1671±0.12262
pythia-1.4b0.7958±0.00009 5.2756±0.09484
Batch-TopK Qwen3-1.7B0.6926±0.01003 18.1650±0.11887
gemma-3-1b-pt0.6617±0.00301 44.4503±0.20351
pythia-1.4b0.6856±0.00205 24.3850±0.08773
Panneal Qwen3-1.7B0.7345±0.00500 3.1175±0.03114
gemma-3-1b-pt0.6770±0.00419 2.7399±0.02055
pythia-1.4b0.7413±0.00234 5.7218±0.08165
TopK Qwen3-1.7B0.7027±0.00024 15.0734±0.03822
gemma-3-1b-pt0.6758±0.00334 42.6148±0.18811
pythia-1.4b0.6969±0.00399 22.7108±0.10553
Table 6.Comparison of Pearson correlation (MPC) and MSE across methods and architectures. Values are mean ± standard deviation over
random seeds.
36